# CHAPTER 1

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to-

- comprehend the meaning of tax and types of taxes;
- discern the difference between direct and indirect taxes;
- appreciate the components of income-tax law;
- comprehend the procedure for computation of total income for the purpose of levy of income-tax;
- comprehend and appreciate the meaning of the important terms used in the Income-tax Act, 1961;
- comprehend the meaning and scope of agricultural income and apply the same to identify whether a particular income falls within the scope of agricultural income;
- identify the operations which are partly agricultural and partly non-agricultural and compute the agricultural income and business income arising from such operations;
- recognise the previous year and assessment year for the purpose of computing income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961;
- examine the circumstances when income of the previous year would be assessed to tax in the previous year itself;
# 1.2 INCOME TAX LAW

• apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of such person under default tax regime u/s 115BAC;

• apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of such person, who exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

# Basic Concepts

|Components of Income-tax Law|Steps for computation of Total Income (TI) and tax liability|Important Definitions|Basis of charge & rates of tax|
|---|---|---|---|
|Income-tax Act, 1961|Determination of residential status|Assessment|Rates of Income-tax|
|Annual Finance Act|Classification of income under different heads|Person|Charge of Income-tax|
|Income-tax Rules|Computation of income under each head|Income| |
|Circulars and Notifications|Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.|India| |
|Legal decisions|Set off or carry forward & set off of losses|Assessment Year| |
|Computation of Gross Total Income (GTI)|Deductions from GTI|Previous Year|Agricultural income|
|Computation of TI|Computation of tax liability| | |

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1. INTRODUCTION

# 1.1 What is the meaning of tax?

Let us begin by understanding the meaning of tax. Article 366(28) of the Constitution of India defines the term “Taxation” as follows – “Taxation includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special, and tax shall be construed accordingly."

Taxes are considered to be the “cost of living in a society”. Taxes are levied by the Governments to meet the common welfare expenditure of the society. There are two types of taxes - direct taxes and indirect taxes.

# Direct Taxes:

If tax is levied directly on the income or wealth of a person, then, it is a direct tax. The person who pays the tax to the Government cannot recover it from somebody else i.e. the burden of a direct tax cannot be shifted. E.g., Income-tax.

# Indirect Taxes:

If tax is levied on the price of a good or service, then, it is an indirect tax e.g. Goods and Services Tax (GST) or Custom Duty. In the case of indirect taxes, the person paying the tax passes on the incidence to another person.

|TYPE OF TAXES|DIRECT TAXES|INDIRECT TAXES|
|---|---|---|
|INCOME TAX|TAX ON UNDISCLOSED FOREIGN INCOME AND ASSETS|GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (GST)|
| | |CUSTOMS DUTY|

# 1.2 Why are taxes levied?

The reason for levy of taxes is that they constitute the basic source of revenue to the Government. Revenue so raised is utilized for meeting the expenses of
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.3 Power to levy taxes

The Constitution of India, in Article 265 lays down that “No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law.” Accordingly for levy of any tax, a law needs to be framed by the government.

Constitution of India gives the power to levy and collect taxes, whether direct or indirect, to the Central and the State Government. The Parliament and State Legislatures are empowered to make laws on the matters enumerated in the Seventh Schedule by virtue of Article 246 of the Constitution of India.

Seventh Schedule to Article 246 contains three lists which enumerate the matters under which the Parliament and the State Legislatures have the authority to make laws for the purpose of levy of taxes.

The following are the lists:

- (i) Union List: Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws on the matters contained in Union List.
- (ii) State List: The Legislatures of any State has the exclusive power to make laws on the matters contained in the State List.
- (iii) Concurrent List: Both Parliament and State Legislatures have the power to make laws on the matters contained in the Concurrent list.

Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List i.e., List I in the Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of India has given the power to the Parliament to make laws on taxes on income other than agricultural income.

# 1.4 Overview of Income-tax law in India

In this material, we would be introducing the students to the Income-tax law in India. The income-tax law in India consists of the following components –
# 1.6 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX ACT

# LEGAL DECISIONS OF COURTS

# ANNUAL FINANCE ACT

# COMPONENTS OF INCOME TAX LAW

# CIRCULARS/NOTIFICATIONS

# INCOME TAX RULES

The various instruments of law containing the law relating to income-tax are explained below.

# Income-tax Act, 1961

The levy of income-tax in India is governed by the Income-tax Act, 1961. In this book, we shall briefly refer to this as the Act.

- It extends to the whole of India.
- It came into force on 1st April, 1962.
- It contains sections 1 to 298 and schedules I to XIV.

❖ A section may have sub-sections or clauses and sub-clauses.

➢ When each part of the section is independent of each other and one is not related with other, such parts are called a “Clause”. “Sub section”, on the other hand refers to such parts of a section where each part is related with other and all sub sections taken together completes the concept propounded in that section.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.7

- Example
- The clauses of section 2 define the meaning of terms used in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Clause (1A) defines “agricultural income”, clause (1B) defines “amalgamation” and so on. Each one of them is independent of other clause of the same section.
- Likewise, the clauses of section 10 contain the exemptions in respect of certain income, like clause (1) provides for exemption of agricultural income and clause (2) provides for exemption of share income of a member of a Hindu Undivided Family and so on.
- Section 5 defining the scope of total income has two sub-sections (1) and (2). Sub-section (1) defines the scope of total income of a resident and sub-section (2) defines the scope of total income of a non-resident. Each sub section is related with the other in the sense that only when one reads them all, one gets the complete idea related with scope of total income.

A section may also have Provisos and Explanations.

- The Proviso(s) to a section/sub-section/clause spells out the exception(s)/ condition(s) to the provision contained in the respective section/ sub-section/ clause, i.e., the proviso spells out the cases where the provision contained in the respective section/ sub-section/ clause would not apply or where the provision would apply with certain modification.
- The Explanation to a section/ sub-section/ clause gives a clarification relating to the provision contained in the respective section/ sub-section/ clause.

- Example
- Sections 80GGB and 80GGC provides for deduction from gross total income in respect of contributions made by companies and other persons, respectively, to political parties or an electoral trust.
# 1.8 INCOME TAX LAW

The proviso to sections 80GGB and 80GGC provide that no deduction shall be allowed under those sections in respect of any sum contributed by cash to political parties or an electoral trust. Thus, the provisos to these sections spell out the circumstance when deduction would not be available thereunder in respect of contributions made.

The Explanation below section 80GGC provides that for the purposes of sections 80GGB and 80GGC, “political party” means a political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. Thus, the Explanation clarifies that the political party has to be a registered political party.

The Income-tax Act, 1961 undergoes change every year with additions and substitutions brought in by the Annual Finance Act passed by Parliament. Sometimes, the Income-tax Act, 1961 is also amended through other legislations like Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act.

# The Finance Act

Every year, the Finance Minister of the Government of India introduces the Finance Bill in the Parliament’s Budget Session. When the Finance Bill is passed by both the houses of the Parliament and gets the assent of the President, it becomes the Finance Act. Amendments are made every year to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and other tax laws by the Finance Act.

# First Schedule to the Finance Act

The First Schedule to the Finance Act contains four parts which specify the rates of tax:

- Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act specifies the rates of tax applicable for the current Assessment Year. Accordingly, Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 2023 specifies the rates of tax for A.Y. 2023-24.
- Part II specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for the current Financial Year. Accordingly, Part II of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 2023 specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for F.Y. 2023-24.
- Part III gives the rates for calculating income-tax for deducting tax from income chargeable under the head “Salaries” and computation of advance tax for F.Y. 2023-24 where the assessee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
- Part IV gives the rules for computing net agricultural income.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.9

Income-tax Rules, 1962

The administration of direct taxes is looked after by the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).

- The CBDT is empowered to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
- For the proper administration of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the CBDT frames rules from time to time. These rules are collectively called Income-tax Rules, 1962.
- Rules also have sub-rules, provisos and Explanations. The proviso to a Rule/Sub-rule spells out the exception to the limits, conditions, guidelines, basis of valuation, as the case may be, spelt out in the Rule/Sub-rule. The Explanation gives clarification for the purposes of the Rule.
- It is important to keep in mind that along with the Income-tax Act, 1961, these rules should also be studied.

# Circulars and Notifications

# Circulars

- Circulars are issued by the CBDT from time to time to deal with certain specific problems and to clarify doubts regarding the scope and meaning of certain provisions of the Act.
- Circulars are issued for the guidance of the officers and/or assessees.
- The department is bound by the circulars. While such circulars are not binding on the assessees, they can take advantage of beneficial circulars.

# Notifications

Notifications are issued by the Central Government to give effect to the provisions of the Act. The CBDT is also empowered to make and amend rules for the purposes of the Act by issue of notifications which are binding on both department and assessees.

# Legal decisions of Courts

Case Laws refer to decision given by courts. The study of case laws is an important and unavoidable part of the study of Income-tax law. It is not possible for
# 1.10 INCOME TAX LAW

Parliament to conceive and provide for all possible issues that may arise in the implementation of any Act. Hence the judiciary will hear the disputes between the assessees and the department and give decisions on various issues.

The Supreme Court is the Apex Court of the Country and the law laid down by the Supreme Court is the law of the land. The decisions given by various High Courts will apply in the respective states in which such High Courts have jurisdiction.

Note – Case laws are dealt with at the Final level.

# 2. CHARGE OF INCOME TAX

Section 4 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is the charging section which provides that:

1. Tax shall be charged at the rates prescribed for the year by the Annual Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both.
2. The charge is on every person specified under section 2(31);
3. Tax is chargeable on the total income earned during the previous year and not the assessment year. (There are certain exceptions provided by sections 172, 174, 174A, 175 and 176);
4. Tax shall be levied in accordance with and subject to the various provisions contained in the Act.

This section is the back bone of the law of income-tax in so far as it serves as the most operative provision of the Act. The tax liability of a person springs from this section.

A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), Association of Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc.

# (1) Total Income and Tax Payable

Income-tax is levied on an assessee’s total income. Such total income has to be computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Let us go step by step to understand the procedure for computation of total income of an individual for the purpose of levy of income-tax –
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.11

Step 1 – Determination of residential status

The residential status of a person has to be determined to ascertain which income is to be included in computing the total income. The residential status as per the Income-tax Act, 1961 can be classified as under –

# RESIDENTIAL STATUS UNDER THE INCOME TAX ACT, 1961

|RESIDENT|DEEMED RESIDENT|NON-RESIDENT|
|---|---|---|
|RESIDENT AND ORDINARILY RESIDENT|RESIDENT BUT NOT ORDINARILY RESIDENT| |

In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in India in the relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the earlier previous years determines his residential status. Based on the days spent by him in India, he may be (a) resident and ordinarily resident, (b) resident but not ordinarily resident, or (c) non-resident.

The residential status of a person determines the taxability of the income. For e.g., income earned and received outside India will not be taxable in the hands of a non-resident but will be taxable in case of a resident and ordinarily resident.

There is also a concept of deemed resident for which presence of individual in India is not required. A deemed resident is always a resident but not ordinarily resident in India. Determination of residential status has been discussed in Chapter 2.

Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads

A person may earn income from different sources. For example, a salaried person earns income by way of salary. He also gets interest from bank savings account/fixed deposit. Apart from this, if he has invested in shares, he would be getting dividend and when he sells these shares, he may earn profit on such sale. If he owns a residential property which he has let out, he would earn rental income.

Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of a tax payer are classified into five different heads of income. These are shown below –
# 1.12 INCOME TAX LAW

# HEADS OF INCOME

SALARIES
INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY
PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION
CAPITAL GAINS
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES
There is a charging section under each head of income which defines the scope of income chargeable under that head. These heads of income exhaust all possible types of income that can accrue to or be received by the tax payer. Accordingly, income earned is classified as follows:

1. Salary, pension etc. earned is taxable under the head “Salaries”.
2. Rental income is taxable under the head “Income from house property”.
3. Income derived from carrying on any business or profession is taxable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
4. Profit from sale of a capital asset (like land, building and shares) is taxable under the head “Capital Gains”.
5. The fifth head of income is the residuary head. Income which is chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 but not taxable under the first four heads will be taxed under the head “Income from other sources”.

The tax payer has to classify the income earned under the relevant head of income.

# Step 3 – Computation of income under each head

Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a particular head of income.

# Exemptions:

There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax e.g., agricultural income. These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part of total income.

Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax e.g., Commuted pension. These incomes are excluded only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. The balance income over and above the prescribed exemption limits would enter computation of total income and have to be classified under the relevant head of income.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.13

Deductions: There are deductions and allowances prescribed under each head of income. For example, while calculating income from house property for let out property, municipal taxes and interest on loan are allowed as deduction. Similarly, deductions and allowances are prescribed under other heads of income. These deductions etc. have to be considered before arriving at the net income chargeable under each head.

These exemptions and deductions would be available to the individual depending upon the regime in which he pays tax. Tax regime under section 115BAC is the default tax regime which provides for concessional rates of tax to individuals/HUFs/AoPs/BoIs/Artificial juridical persons. However, certain exemptions and deductions are not allowed under the default tax regime. Such assessees have an option to opt out of the said regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act. These tax regimes i.e., the default tax regime under section 115BAC and optional tax regime under the normal provisions of the Act are discussed in detail later on in this Chapter.

For detailed discussion on exemptions and deductions under each head, refer to Chapter 3: Heads of Income.

# Disallowance of expenditure in relation to exempt income [Section 14A]

- As per section 14A, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, expenditure incurred in relation to any exempt income is not allowed as a deduction while computing income under any of the five heads of income.
- The Assessing Officer is empowered to determine the amount of expenditure incurred in relation to such income which does not form part of total income in accordance with such method as may be prescribed.
- The method for determining expenditure in relation to exempt income for the purpose of disallowance of such expenditure under section 14A is prescribed by the CBDT.
- The provisions of section 14A regarding disallowance of expenses would apply even in a case where exempt income has not accrued or arisen or has not been received during the previous year relevant to an assessment year and the expenditure has been incurred during the said previous year in relation to such exempt income.

# Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.

In case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total income. The tax system is progressive i.e., as the income increases, the applicable rate of
# 1.14 INCOME TAX LAW

Tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize their tax burden.

In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been incorporated in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse, minor child etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted his income for the purpose of computing tax liability. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 4: Income of other persons included in assessee’s total income.

# Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses

An assessee may have different sources of income under the same head of income. He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. For instance, an assessee may have profit from his textile business and loss from his printing business. This loss can be set-off against the profits of textile business to arrive at the net income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

Similarly, an assessee can have loss under one head of income, say, profits and gains of business or profession and profits under another heads of income, say, income from house property. There are provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961 for allowing inter-head adjustment in certain cases.

However, there are also restrictions in certain cases, like business loss is not allowed to be set-off against salary income. Default tax regime under section 115BAC puts further more restrictions like loss from house property cannot be set off from income under any other head. Further, losses which cannot be set-off in the current year due to inadequacy of eligible profits can be carried forward for set-off in the subsequent years as per the provisions contained in the Act. Generally, brought forward losses under a particular head cannot be set-off against income under another head i.e., brought forward business loss cannot be set-off against income from house property of the current year. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 5: Aggregation of income, set-off and carry forward of losses.

# Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income

The final figures of income or loss under each head of income, after allowing the eligible deductions, allowances and other adjustments, are then aggregated, after giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry forward of losses, to arrive at the gross total income.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.15 a

# Step 7 – Deductions from Gross Total Income

There are deductions prescribed from Gross Total Income. Two types of deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA. These deductions would be allowable to the assessee who opts out of the default tax regime and pays tax under the optional tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act, subject to fulfillment of requisite conditions stipulated thereunder.

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

(in case of an assessee opting out of the default tax regime)

|DEDUCTIONS UNDER CHAPTER-VIA|DEDUCTION UNDER SECTION 10AA|
|---|---|
|DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN PAYMENTS|DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN INCOMES|
|Examples|Examples|
|1. Life Insurance Premium paid|1. Employment of new employees|
|2. Contribution to Provident Fund/ Pension Fund|2. Royalty income etc. of authors of certain books other than text books|
|3. Medical insurance premium paid|3. Royalty on patents|
|4. Payment of interest on loan taken for higher education| |
|5. Payment of interest on loan taken for residential house| |
|6. Payment of interest on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle| |
|7. Rent paid| |
|8. Donation to certain funds, charitable institutions, etc.| |
|9. Contributions to political parties| |
| |DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER INCOME|
| |Examples|
| |1. Interest on deposits in saving account|
| |2. Interest on deposits in case of senior citizens|
| |Example Deduction in case of a person with disability|

# 1.16 INCOME TAX LAW

However, under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, only select deductions are permissible.

For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 6: Deductions from Gross Total Income.

# Step 8 – Computation of Total income

The income arrived at, after claiming the above deductions from the Gross Total Income is known as the Total Income. It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as per section 288A. The process of computation of total income is shown hereunder –

# COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

|Determine the residential status| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Classify income under five heads| | | | |
|Salaries|Income from house property|Profits and gains from business or profession|Capital gains|Income from other sources|
|Compute income under each head applying the charging & deeming provisions and providing for permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder| | | | |
|Apply clubbing provisions| | | | |
|Set-off/carry forward and set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act/default tax regime| | | | |
|Compute Gross Total Income (GTI)| | | | |
|Less: Deductions from GTI| | | | |
|Total Income (TI)| | | | |

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.17

# Step 9 – Application of the rates of tax on the total income

Rates prescribed under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act for default tax regime

Section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for concessional rates of tax to individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons. Under this regime certain exemptions/deductions are, however, not available like Leave Travel Concession, interest on housing loan on self-occupied property, deductions under Chapter VI-A [other than section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) or section 80JJAA] etc. The rates given under section 115BAC are the default tax rates unless the assessee exercises an option to shift out of the said regime. The basic exemption limit under section 115BAC is ` 3,00,000. This means that no tax is payable by an assessee with total income of upto ` 3,00,000. The tax rates under section 115BAC is as follows -

|S. No.|Total Income|Rate of tax|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Upto ` 3,00,000|Nil|
|2.|From ` 3,00,000 to ` 6,00,000|5%|
|3.|From ` 6,00,000 to ` 9,00,000|10%|
|4.|From ` 9,00,000 to ` 12,00,000|15%|
|5.|From ` 12,00,000 to ` 15,00,000|20%|
|6.|Above ` 15,00,000|30%|

Rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax regime

Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons, who exercise the option to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC, have to pay tax as per normal provisions of the Act. Under the normal provisions of the Act, the rates of tax are prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of the year.

For individuals, HUF etc., the basic exemption limit is ` 2,50,000. This means that, as per the normal provisions of the Act, no tax is payable by individuals with total income of upto ` 2,50,000. Those individuals whose total income is more than ` 2,50,000 but less than ` 5,00,000 have to pay tax on their total income in excess of ` 2,50,000@5%. Total income between ` 5,00,000 and ` 10,00,000 attracts tax @20%. The highest rate is 30%, which is attracted in respect of income in excess of ` 10,00,000. The tax rates have to be applied on the total income to arrive at the income-tax liability.
# 1.18 INCOME TAX LAW

However, resident individuals enjoy rebate under section 87A in both the tax regimes which are discussed later on in this chapter.

For certain income (like Long Term Capital Gains, Lottery Income, Specified Short Term Capital Gains etc.), slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes. These incomes are taxable at special rates of taxation under both the tax regimes. These special rates are contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 itself.

# Step 10 - Surcharge / Rebate under section 87A

Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax, where total income exceeds ` 50 lakhs. The rates of surcharge applicable for different slabs of total income are discussed later on in this chapter.

Rebate under section 87A: In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax payers, section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an individual resident in India, whose total income does not exceed ` 7,00,000 under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or ` 5,00,000 under the normal provisions of the Act if he opts out of the default tax regime. Under the default tax regime, an individual whose total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs marginally is also entitled to a rebate of the difference between tax on total income and the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs, when the former is greater than the latter.

# Step 11 – Health and education cess on income-tax

The income-tax, as increased by the surcharge or as reduced by the rebate under section 87A, if applicable, is to be further increased by an additional surcharge called health and education cess on income-tax @4% of income-tax plus surcharge, if applicable.

# Step 12 – Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)

The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains certain profit-linked and investment linked deductions under normal provisions of the Act to promote investment in various sectors. These tax benefits help to reduce the tax liability of the taxpayers who exercise the option to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC and become eligible to claim such deductions. In order to preserve the tax base vis-a-vis profit linked and investment linked deductions, the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for levy of alternate minimum tax. Section 115JC provides for minimum tax to be paid by the taxpayers on their total income without providing profit linked.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

and investment linked deductions. However, the taxpayer can claim the tax credit of the excess tax paid over the regular income-tax payable.

Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, are not liable to alternate minimum tax under section 115JC.

For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 9: Income-tax liability – Computation and Optimisation.

# Step 13 – Examine whether to pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions of the Act

Total income and tax liability of individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons may be computed in accordance with both the default tax regime under section 115BAC and as per the regular provisions of the Act including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable. Then, such persons can determine which is more beneficial and accordingly decide whether or not to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs not having income from business or profession can choose whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime in each previous year. They may choose to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default tax regime in another year.

# Step 14 – Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source

Although the tax liability of an assessee is determined only at the end of the year, tax is required to be paid in advance in four installments on the basis of estimated income i.e., on or before 15ᵗʰ June, 15ᵗʰ September, 15ᵗʰ December and 15ᵗʰ March.

However, residents declaring profits under presumptive taxation scheme (where business income is computed as a percentage of gross receipts/turnover) can pay advance tax in one installment on or before 15ᵗʰ March instead of four installments.

In certain cases, tax is required to be deducted at source from the income by the payer at the rates prescribed in the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Annual Finance Act. Such deduction should be made either at the time of accrual or at the time of payment, as prescribed by the Act.

Example: In the case of salary income, the obligation of the employer to deduct tax at source arises only at the time of payment of salary to the employees.
# 1.20 INCOME TAX LAW

However, in respect of other payments like, fees for professional services, fees for technical services, interest payable to residents, the person responsible for paying is liable to deduct tax at source at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier. Such tax deducted at source has to be remitted to the credit of the Central Government through any branch of the RBI, SBI or any authorized bank within the statutory due dates. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 7: Advance tax, tax deduction at source and tax collection at source.

# Step 15: Tax Payable/Tax Refundable

After adjusting the advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source, the assessee would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such amount should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as per section 288B. The assessee has to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) on or before the due date of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee will get the same after filing the return of income.

# (2) Return of Income

The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains provisions for filing of return of income. Return of income is the format in which the assessee furnishes information as to his total income and tax payable. The format for filing of returns by different assessees is notified by the CBDT. The particulars of income earned under different heads, gross total income, deductions from gross total income, total income and tax payable by the assessee are required to be furnished in the return of income. In short, a return of income is the declaration of income by the assessee in the prescribed format. The Act has prescribed due dates for filing return of income in case of different assessees. Companies and firms have to mandatorily file their return of income before the due date. Other assessees are required to file a return of income subject to fulfilling of certain conditions.

# 3. IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS

In order to understand the provisions of the Act, one must have a thorough knowledge of the meanings of certain key terms like ‘person’, ‘assessee’, ‘income’, etc. To understand the meanings of these terms we have to first check whether they are defined in the Act.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Terms defined in the Act: Section 2 gives definitions of the various terms and expressions used therein. If a particular definition is given in the Act itself, we have to be guided by that definition. For e.g. the term ‘perquisite’ has been defined under section 17(2) for the purpose of taxation of salaries.

Terms not defined under the Act: If a particular definition is not given in the Act, reference can be made to the General Clauses Act or dictionaries. Students should note this point carefully because certain terms like “dividend”, “transfer”, etc. have been given a wider meaning in the Income-tax Act, 1961 than they are commonly understood. Some of the important terms defined under section 2 are given below:

# 3.1 Assessee [Section 2(7)]

“Assessee” means a person by whom any tax or any other sum of money is payable under this Act. In addition, it includes –

- Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been taken for the assessment of
- his income; or
- the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable; or
- the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or
- the amount of refund due to him or to such other person.
- Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of this Act;
- Every person who is deemed to be an assessee-in-default under any provision of this Act.
- Every assessee is a ‘person’, but every ‘person’ need not be an assessee.

# 3.2 Assessment [Section 2(8)]

This is the procedure by which the income of an assessee is determined. It may be by way of a normal assessment or by way of reassessment of an income previously assessed. Assessment Procedure will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.
# 1.22 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3.3 Person [Section 2(31)]

The definition of ‘assessee’ leads us to the definition of ‘person’ as the former is closely connected with the latter. The term ‘person’ is important from another point of view also viz., the charge of income-tax is on every ‘person’.

|Individual|Artificial|juridical|HUF|
|---|---|---|---|
|Person|Local|Company|AOP/BOI|
|Firm| | | |

We may briefly consider some of the above seven categories of persons each of which constitute a separate unit of assessment or a separate tax entity.

# (i) Individual

The term ‘individual’ means only a natural person, i.e., a human being.

- It includes both males and females.
- It also includes a minor or a person of unsound mind. But the assessment in such a case may be made1 on the guardian or manager of the minor or lunatic who is entitled to receive his income. In the case of deceased person, assessment would be made on the legal representative.

# (ii) HUF

Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, a Hindu undivided family (HUF) is treated as a separate entity for the purpose of assessment. It is included in the definition of the1 under section 161(1).
# BASIC CONCEPTS

The term “person” under section 2(31). The levy of income-tax is on “every person”. Therefore, income-tax is payable by a HUF.

"Hindu undivided family" has not been defined under the Income-tax Act. The expression is, however, defined under the Hindu Law as a family, which consists of all males lineally descended from a common ancestor and includes their wives and daughters.

Some members of the HUF are called co-parceners. They are related to each other and to the head of the family. HUF may contain many members, but members within four degrees including the head of the family (Karta) are called co-parceners.

A Hindu Coparcenary includes those persons who acquire an interest in joint family property by birth. Earlier, only male descendants were considered as coparceners. With effect from 6ᵗʰ September, 2005, daughters have also been accorded coparcenary status. It may be noted that only the coparceners have a right to partition.

A daughter of coparcener by birth shall become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as the son. Being a coparcener, she can claim partition of assets of the family. The rights of a daughter in coparcenary property are equal to that of a son. However, other female members of the family, for example, wife or daughter-in-law of a coparcener are not eligible for such coparcenary rights.

The relation of a HUF does not arise from a contract but arises from status. There need not be more than one male member or one female coparcener w.e.f. 6ᵗʰ September, 2005 to form a HUF. The Income-tax Act, 1961 also does not indicate that a HUF as an assessable entity must consist of at least two male members or two coparceners.

Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, Jain undivided families and Sikh undivided families would also be assessed as a HUF.

# Schools of Hindu Law

|Dayabaga school|Mitakshara school|
|---|---|
|West Bengal and Assam|Rest of India except West Bengal and Assam|

# 1.24 INCOME TAX LAW

The basic difference between the two schools of Hindu law with regard to succession is as follows:

|Dayabaga school of Hindu law|Mitakshara school of Hindu law|
|---|---|
|Prevalent in West Bengal and Assam|Prevalent in rest of India|
|Nobody acquires the right, share in the property by birth as long as the head of family is living.|One acquires the right to the family property by his birth and not by succession irrespective of the fact that his elders are living.|
|Thus, the children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as long as his father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will acquire right/share in the property.|Thus, every child born in the family acquires a right/share in the family property.|
|Hence, the father and his brothers would be the coparceners of the HUF.| |

# (iii) Company [Section 2(17)]

For all purposes of the Act, the term ‘Company’, has a much wider connotation than that under the Companies Act. Under the Act, the expression ‘Company’ means:

1. any Indian company as defined in section 2(26); or
2. any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside India, i.e., any foreign company; or
3. any institution, association or body which is assessable or was assessed as a company for any assessment year under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or for any assessment year commencing on or before 1.4.1970 under the present Act; or
4. any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or not and whether Indian or non-Indian, which is declared by a general or special order of the CBDT to be a company for such assessment years as may be specified in the CBDT’s order.

# Classes of Companies

1. Domestic company [Section 2(22A)] - It means an Indian company or any other company which, in respect of its income liable to income-tax, has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends (including dividends on preference shares) within India, payable out of such income.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Indian company [Section 2(26)] - Two conditions should be satisfied so that a company can be regarded as an Indian company -

1. the company should have been formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956² and
2. the registered office or the principal office of the company should be in India.

The expression ‘Indian Company’ also includes the following provided their registered or principal office is in India:

1. a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act (like Financial Corporation or a State Road Transport Corporation);
2. an institution or association or body which is declared by the Board to be a company under section 2(17)(iv);
3. a company formed and registered under any law relating to companies which was or is in force in any part of India [other than Jammu and Kashmir and Union territories mentioned in sub-clause (v) below];
4. in the case of Jammu and Kashmir, a company formed and registered under any law for the time being in force in Jammu and Kashmir;
5. in the case of any of the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry or State of Goa, a company formed and registered under any law for the time being in force in that Union territory or State, respectively.

# Foreign company [Section 2(23A)]

Foreign company means a company which is not a domestic company

|Classes of companies|Domestic company|Foreign company|
|---|---|---|
|Indian company|Company which has made arrangement for declaring and paying dividend within India out of the income chargeable to tax in India.|A company which is not a domestic company|

# 1.26 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iv) Firm [Section 2(23)]

The terms ‘firm’, ‘partner’ and ‘partnership’ have the same meanings as assigned to them in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. In addition, the definitions also include the terms limited liability partnership and a partner of limited liability partnership as they have been defined in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.

In an LLP, since liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution therein, it contains elements of both a corporate structure as well as a partnership firm structure.

However, for income-tax purposes a minor admitted to the benefits of an existing partnership would also be treated as partner.

| |Firm|As defined| |
|---|---|---|---|
|under the Partnership Act, 1932|under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008| | |
|A partnership is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of business carried on by all or any of them acting for all. The persons who have entered into partnership with one another are called individually ‘partners’ and collectively a ‘firm’.| | | |

# (v) Association of Persons (AOP)

When persons combine together for promotion of joint enterprise they are assessable as an AOP, if they do not in law constitute a partnership. In order to constitute an association, persons must join for a common purpose or action and their object must be to produce income; it is not enough that the persons receive the income jointly. Co-heirs, co-legatees or co-donees joining together for a common purpose or action would be chargeable as an AOP. For e.g., Mr. Yash, AB & Co. (Firm) and X (P) Ltd. join together to carry on construction activity otherwise than as a partnership firm, such an association will be recognized as an association of persons.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.27

# (vi) Body of Individuals (BOI)

It denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees who merely receive the income jointly and who may be assessable in like manner and to the same extent as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-executors or co-trustees are assessable as a BOI as their title and interest are indivisible. Income-tax shall not be payable by an assessee in respect of the receipt of share of income by him from BOI and on which the tax has already been paid by such BOI. For e.g., mutual trade associations, members club, etc.

Section 2(31) further explains that an association of persons or a body of individuals shall be treated as a person, whether or not it was formed with the object of deriving income, profits or gains. Accordingly, even if such entities have been formed not for earning any income/ profit still they are "person" for the purpose of the Act and are covered by the provisions of the Act.

# Difference between AOP and BOI:

In case of a BOI, only individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any person can be its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member of AOP but not of BOI.

In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will for a common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common will may or may not be present.

# (vii) Local Authority

The term “Local Authority” means a municipal committee, district board, body of port commissioners or other authority legally entitled to or entrusted by the Government with the control or management of a municipal or local fund.

Note: A local authority is taxable in respect of that part of its income which arises from any business carried on by it in so far as that income does not arise from the supply of a commodity or service within its own jurisdictional area. However, income arising from the supply of water and electricity even outside the local authority’s own jurisdictional area is exempt from tax.
# 1.28 INCOME TAX LAW

# (viii) Artificial Juridical Persons

Artificial Juridical Persons are the entities which are not natural persons but are separate entities in the eyes of law. This is a residual category could cover all artificial persons with a juristic personality not falling under any other category of persons. Deities, Bar Council, Universities are some important examples of Artificial Juridical Persons.

# 3.4 Income [Section 2(24)]

# (1) Definition of Income

The definition of income as per the Income-tax Act, 1961 begins with the words “Income includes”. Therefore, it is an inclusive definition and not an exhaustive one. Such a definition does not confine the scope of income but leaves room for more inclusions within the ambit of the term.

Section 2(24) of the Act gives a statutory definition of income. The following items of receipts are specifically included in the said definition:—

1. Profits and gains;
2. Dividends;
3. Voluntary contributions received by a trust/institution created wholly or partly for charitable or religious purposes or by certain research association or universities and other educational institutions or hospitals and other medical institutions or an electoral trust;
4. The value of any perquisite or profit in lieu of salary taxable under section 17(2)/(3);
5. Any special allowance or benefit, other than the perquisite included above, specifically granted to the assessee to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and exclusively for the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit;
6. Any allowance granted to the assessee to meet his personal expenses at the place where the duties of his office or employment of profit are ordinarily performed by him or at a place where he ordinarily resides or to compensate him for the increased cost of living;
7. The value of any benefit or perquisite whether convertible into money or not, obtained from a company either by a director or by a person who has a
# BASIC CONCEPTS

1. A substantial interest in the company or by a relative of the director or such person and any sum paid by any such company in respect of any obligation which, but for such payment, would have been payable by the director or other person aforesaid;
2. The value of any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible into money or not, which is obtained by any representative assessee3 or by any beneficiary and any amount paid by the representative assessee for the benefit of the beneficiary which the beneficiary would have ordinarily been required to pay.
3. Profits and gains of business or profession chargeable to tax under section 28(ii)/(iii)/(iiia)/(iiib)/(iiic)/(v)/(va);
4. Deemed profits chargeable to tax under section 41 or section 59;
5. The value of any benefit or perquisite taxable under section 28(iv);
6. Any capital gains chargeable under section 45;
7. Any winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling, or betting of any form or nature whatsoever. For this purpose,
1. “Lottery” includes winnings from prizes awarded to any person by draw of lots or by chance or in any other manner whatsoever, under any scheme or arrangement by whatever name called;
2. “Card game and other game of any sort” includes any game show, an entertainment programme on television or electronic mode, in which people compete to win prizes or any other similar game;
8. Any sum received by the assessee from his employees as contributions to any provident fund (PF) or superannuation fund or Employees State Insurance Fund (ESI) or any other fund for the welfare of such employees;
9. Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy will constitute income; “Keyman insurance policy” means a life insurance policy taken by a person on the life of another person where the latter is or was an employee of former or is or was connected in any manner whatsoever with the former’s business.

3 mentioned in section 160(1)(iii)/(iv)
# 1.30 INCOME TAX LAW

It also includes such policy which has been assigned to a person with or without any consideration, at any time during the term of the policy.

1. Fair market value of inventory as on the date of its conversion into or treatment as a capital asset under section 28(va);
2. Any consideration received for issue of shares as exceeds the fair market value of the shares [Section 56(2)(viib)];
3. Any sum of money received as advance, if such sum is forfeited consequent to failure of negotiation for transfer of a capital asset [Section 56(2)(ix)];
4. Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for inadequate consideration by any person [Section 56(2)(x)];
5. Any compensation or other payment, due to or received by any person, in connection with termination of his employment or the modification of the term and conditions relating thereto [Section 56(2)(xi)];
6. Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D), to the extent the same exceeds the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of the policy, and not claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act [Section 56(2)(xiii)];

[For details, refer to Unit 5 of Chapter 3: Income from Other Sources]

Assistance in the form of a subsidy or grant or cash incentive or duty drawback or waiver or concession or reimbursement, by whatever name called, by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority or body or agency in cash or kind to the assessee is included in the definition of income. However, subsidy or grant or reimbursement which has been taken into account for determination of the actual cost of the depreciable asset in accordance with Explanation 10 to section 43(1) shall not be included in the definition of income.

# 2 Concept of Income under the Income-tax Act, 1961

➢ Regular receipt vis-a-vis casual receipt: Income, in general, means a periodic monetary return which accrues or is expected to accrue regularly from definite sources. However, under the Income-tax Act, 1961, even certain
# BASIC CONCEPTS

1.31 a

Casual receipts which do not arise regularly are treated as income for tax purposes e.g. Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles.

- Revenue receipt vis-a-vis Capital receipt: Income normally refers to revenue receipts. Capital receipts are generally not included within the scope of income in general parlance. However, the Income-tax Act, 1961 has specifically included certain capital receipts within the definition of income e.g., Capital gains i.e., gains on sale of a capital assets like land, jewellery.
- Net receipt vis-a-vis Gross receipt: Income means net receipts and not gross receipts. Net receipts are arrived at after deducting the expenditure incurred in connection with earning such receipts. The expenditure which can be deducted while computing income under each head is prescribed under the Income-tax Act, 1961. Income from certain eligible businesses/professions is also determined on presumptive basis i.e., as a certain percentage of gross receipts. [We will discuss in detail in Unit 3 of Chapter 3: Profits and gains of business or profession].
- Due basis vis-a-vis receipt basis: Income is taxable either on due basis or receipt basis. For computing income under the heads “Profits and gains of business or profession” and “Income from other sources”, the method of accounting regularly employed by the assessee should be considered, which can be either cash system or mercantile system. Some receipts are taxable only on receipt basis, like, income by way of interest received on compensation or enhanced compensation.
- Application of Income vis-a-vis Diversion of Income: Application of income means to discharge an obligation (which is gratuitous or self-imposed) after such income reaches the assessee. Where by virtue of an obligation by overriding title, income is diverted before it reaches the assessee, it is known as diversion of income. In case of the former, the income would be taxable in the hands of the person who applies it, whereas in the case of the latter, it is not taxable (i.e., even if the assessee were to collect the income he does so on behalf of the person to whom it is payable).

# Concept of revenue and capital receipts

Students should carefully study the various items of receipts included in the definition of income. Some of them like capital gains are not revenue receipts. However, since they have been included in the definition, they are chargeable as
# 1.32 INCOME TAX LAW

Income under the Act. The concept of revenue and capital receipts is discussed hereunder -

The Act contemplates a levy of tax on income and not on capital and hence it is very essential to distinguish between capital and revenue receipts. Capital receipts cannot be taxed, unless they fall within the scope of the definition of “income” and so the distinction between capital and revenue receipts is material for tax purposes. Certain capital receipts which have been specifically included in the definition of income are compensation for modification or termination of services, income by way of capital gains etc.

It is not possible to lay down any single test as infallible or any single criterion as decisive, final and universal in application to determine whether a particular receipt is capital or revenue in nature. Hence, the capital or revenue nature of the receipt must be determined with reference to the facts and circumstances of each case.

# Criteria for determining whether a receipt is capital or revenue in nature

The following are some of the important criteria which may be applied to distinguish between capital and revenue receipts.

# Fixed capital or Circulating capital:

A receipt referable to fixed capital would be a capital receipt whereas a receipt referable to circulating capital would be a revenue receipt. The former is not taxable while the latter is taxable. Tangible and intangible assets which the owner keeps in his possession for making profits are in the nature of fixed capital. The circulating capital is one which is turned over and yields income or loss in the process.

# Income from transfer of capital asset or trading asset:

Profits arising from the sale of a capital asset are chargeable to tax as capital gains under section 45 whereas profits arising from the sale of a trading asset being of revenue nature are taxable as income from business under section 28 provided that the sale is in the regular course of assessee’s business or the transaction constitutes an adventure in the nature of trade.

# Capital Receipts vis-a-vis Revenue Receipts: Tests to be applied

1. Transaction entered into the course of business: Profits arising from transactions which are entered into in the course of the business regularly carried on by the assessee, or are incidental to, or associated with the business of the assessee would be revenue receipts chargeable to tax.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Example: A banker’s or financier’s dealings in foreign exchange or sale of shares and securities, a shipbroker’s purchase of ship in his own name, a share broker’s purchase of shares on his own account would constitute transactions entered and yielding income in the ordinary course of their business. Whereas building and land would constitute capital assets in the hands of a trader in shares, the same would constitute stock-in-trade in the hands of a property dealer.

# (2) Profit arising from sale of shares and securities:

In the case of profit arising from the sale of shares and securities, the nature of the profit has to be ascertained from the motive, intention or purpose with which they were bought. If the shares were acquired as an investor or with a view to acquiring a controlling interest or for obtaining a managing or selling agency or a directorship, the profit or loss on their sale would be of a capital nature; but if the shares were acquired in the ordinary course of business as a dealer in shares, it would constitute his stock-in-trade. If the shares were acquired with speculative motive, the profit or loss (although of a revenue nature) would have to be dealt with separately from the profit or loss of other businesses.

Securities held by Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested in such securities in accordance with the regulations made under the SEBI Act, 1992 would be treated as a capital asset. Even if the nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is stock-in-trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on transfer would be taxable as capital gains.

# (3) A single transaction - Can it constitute business?

Even a single transaction may constitute a business or an adventure in the nature of trade even if it is outside the normal course of the assessee’s business. Repetition of such transactions is not necessary. Thus, a bulk purchase followed by a bulk sale or a series of retail sales or bulk sale followed by a series of retail purchases would constitute an adventure in the nature of trade and consequently, the income arising therefrom would be taxable. Purchase of any article with no intention to resell it, but resold under changed circumstances would be a transaction of a capital nature and capital gains would arise. However, where an asset is purchased with the intention to resell it, the question whether the profit on sale is capital or revenue in nature depends upon (i) the conduct of the assessee, (ii) the nature and quantity of the article purchased, (iii) the nature of the operations involved, (iv) whether the venture is on capital or revenue account, and (v) other related circumstances of the case.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1.34

# (4) Liquidated damages:

Receipt of liquidated damages directly and intimately linked with the procurement of a capital asset, which lead to delay in coming into existence of the profit-making apparatus, is a capital receipt. The amount received by the assessee towards compensation for sterilization of the profit earning source is not in the ordinary course of business. Hence, it is a capital receipt in the hands of the assessee.

# (5) Compensation on termination of agency/service contract:

Where an assessee receives compensation on termination of the agency business being the only source of income, the receipt is of capital nature, but taxable under section 28(ii)(c). However, where the assessee has a number of agencies and one of them is terminated and compensation is received therefor, the receipt would be of a revenue nature since taking up an agency and exploiting the same for earning income is in the ordinary course of business. The loss of one agency would be made good by profit from another agency. Compensation received from the employer or from any person for premature termination of the service contract is a capital receipt, but is taxable as profit in lieu of salary under section 17(3) or as income from other sources under section 56(2)(xi), respectively. Compensation received or receivable in connection with the termination or the modification of the terms and conditions of any contract relating to its business shall be taxable as business income.

# (6) Gifts:

Normally, gifts constitute a capital receipt in the hands of the recipient. However, certain gifts are brought within the purview of income-tax, for example, receipt of property without consideration is brought to tax under section 56(2)(x). For example, any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for inadequate consideration by any person, other than a relative, is chargeable under the head “Income from Other Sources” [For details, refer to Unit - 5 of Chapter 3 :Income from Other Sources].

# 3.5 India [Section 2(25A)]

The term 'India' means –

- (i) the territory of India as per Article 1 of the Constitution,
- (ii) its territorial waters, seabed and subsoil underlying such waters,
- (iii) continental shelf,
- (iv) exclusive economic zone or
# BASIC CONCEPTS

(v) any other specified maritime zone and the air space above its territory and territorial waters.

Specified maritime zone means the maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976.

# 3.6 Agricultural income [Section 2(1A)]

Agricultural income definition is very wide and covers the income of not only the cultivators but also the land holders who might have rented out the lands. Agricultural income may be received in cash or in kind.

Agricultural income may arise in any one of the following three ways:

1. It may be rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for agricultural purposes.
2. It may be income derived from such land by
1. agriculture or
2. the performance of a process ordinarily employed by a cultivator or receiver of rent in kind to render the produce fit to be taken to the market or
3. the sale, by a cultivator or receiver of rent in kind, of such agricultural produce raised or received by him, in respect of which no process has been performed other than a process of the nature mentioned in point (b) above.
3. Lastly, agricultural income may be derived from any farm building required for agricultural operations.

Now let us take a critical look at the following aspects:

1. Rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for agricultural purposes: The following three conditions have to be satisfied for income to be treated as agricultural income:
1. Rent or revenue should be derived from land;
2. land has to be situated in India (If agricultural land is situated in a foreign country, the entire income would be taxable); and
3. land should be used for agricultural purposes.
# 1.36 INCOME TAX LAW

The amount received in money or in kind, by one person from another for right to use land is termed as Rent. The rent can either be received by the owner of the land or by the original tenant from the sub-tenant. It implies that ownership of land is not necessary. Thus, the rent received by the original tenant from sub-tenant would also be agricultural income subject to the other conditions mentioned above.

The scope of the term “Revenue” is much broader than rent. It includes income other than rent. For example, fees received for renewal for grant of land on lease would be revenue derived from land.

# (2) Income derived from such land by

# (a) Agriculture

The term “Agriculture” has not been defined in the Act. However, cultivation of a field involving human skill and labour on the land can be broadly termed as agriculture.

“Agriculture” means tilling of the land, sowing of the seeds and similar operations. It involves basic operations and subsequent operations.

|Basic Operations|Subsequent Operations|
|---|---|
|Those operations by agriculturists which are absolutely necessary for the purpose of effectively raising produce from the land|Operations to be performed after the produce sprouts from the land (e.g., weeding, digging etc.)|

These subsequent operations would be agricultural operations only when taken in conjunction with and as a continuation of the basic operations.

Note: The term ‘agriculture’ cannot be extended to all activities which have some distant relation to land like dairy farming, breeding and rearing of live stock, butter and cheese making and poultry farming. This aspect is discussed in detail later on in this chapter.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.37

Whether income from nursery constitutes agricultural income?

Yes, as per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would be deemed to be agricultural income, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land.

# (b) Process ordinarily employed to render the produce fit to be taken to the market:

Sometimes, to make the agricultural produce a saleable commodity, it becomes necessary to perform some kind of process on the produce. The income from the process employed to render the produce fit to be taken to the market would be agricultural income. However, it must be a process ordinarily employed by the cultivator or receiver of rent in kind and the process must be applied to make the produce fit to be taken to the market.

The ordinary process employed to render the produce fit to be taken to market includes thrashing, winnowing, cleaning, drying, crushing etc. For example, the process ordinarily employed by the cultivator to obtain the rice from paddy is to first remove the hay from the basic grain, and thereafter to remove the chaff from the grain. The grain has to be properly filtered to remove stones etc. and finally the rice has to be packed in gunny bags for sale in the market.

After such process, the rice can be taken to the market for sale. This process of making the rice ready for the market may involve manual operations or mechanical operations. All these operations constitute the process ordinarily employed to make the product fit for the market. The produce must retain its original character in spite of the processing unless there is no market for selling it in that condition.

However, if marketing process is performed on a produce which can be sold in its raw form, income derived therefrom is partly agricultural income and partly business income.

# (c) Sale of such agricultural produce in the market:

Any income from the sale of any produce to the cultivator or receiver of rent-in kind is agricultural income provided it is from the land situated in India and used for agricultural purposes. However, if the produce is subjected to any process other than process ordinarily employed to make the
# 1.38 INCOME TAX LAW

produce fit for market, the income arising on sale of such produce would be partly agricultural income and partly non-agricultural income. Similarly, if other agricultural produce like tea, cotton, tobacco, sugarcane etc. are subjected to manufacturing process and the manufactured product is sold, the profit on such sale will consist of agricultural income as well as business income. That portion of the profit representing agricultural income will be exempted.

# Apportionment of Income between business income and agricultural income

Rules 7, 7A, 7B & 8 of Income-tax Rules, 1962 provide the basis of apportionment of income between agricultural income and business income.

# (i) Rule 7

Income from growing and manufacturing of any product - Where income is partially agricultural income and partially income chargeable to income-tax as business income, the market value of any agricultural produce which has been raised by the assessee or received by him as rent in kind and which has been utilised as raw material in such business or the sale receipts of which are included in the accounts of the business shall be deducted. No further deduction shall be made in respect of any expenditure incurred by the assessee as a cultivator or receiver of rent in kind.

# Determination of market value

There are two possibilities here:

1. The agricultural produce is capable of being sold in the market either in its raw stage or after application of any ordinary process to make it fit to be taken to the market. In such a case, the value calculated at the average price at which it has been so sold during the relevant previous year will be the market value.
2. It is possible that the agricultural produce is not capable of being ordinarily sold in the market in its raw form or after application of any ordinary process. In such case the market value will be the total of the following:

- The expenses of cultivation;
- The land revenue or rent paid for the area in which it was grown;
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Such amount as the Assessing Officer finds having regard to the circumstances in each case to represent at reasonable profit.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. B grows sugarcane and uses the same for the purpose of manufacturing sugar in his factory. 30% of sugarcane produce is sold for ` 10 lakhs, and the cost of cultivation of such sugarcane is ` 5 lakhs. The cost of cultivation of the balance sugarcane (70%) is ` 14 lakhs and the market value of the same is ` 22 lakhs. After incurring ` 1.5 lakhs in the manufacturing process on the balance sugarcane, the sugar was sold for ` 25 lakhs. Compute B’s business income and agricultural income.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of Business Income and Agricultural Income of Mr. B

|Particulars|Business Income (`)|Agricultural Income (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Sale of Sugar|25,00,000| |
|Less: Market value of sugarcane (70%)|22,00,000| |
|Less: Manufacturing exp.|1,50,000| |
| |1,50,000| |
|Agricultural income| |22,00,000|
|Less: Cost of cultivation| |14,00,000|
| | |8,00,000|

# 1.40 INCOME TAX LAW

# Sale of sugarcane

|Sale proceeds of sugarcane|10,00,000|
|---|---|
|(30%)| |
|Less: Cost of cultivation|5,00,000|
| |5,00,000|
| |13,00,000|

# (ii) Rule 7A – Income from growing and manufacturing of rubber

This rule is applicable when income derived from the sale of centrifuged latex or cenex or latex based crepes or brown crepes or technically specified block rubbers manufactured or processed from field latex or coagulum obtained from rubber plants grown by the seller in India. In such cases, 35% profits on sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”, and the balance 65% is agricultural income which is exempt.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. C manufactures latex from the rubber plants grown by him in India. These are then sold in the market for ` 30 lakhs. The cost of growing rubber plants is ` 10 lakhs and that of manufacturing latex is ` 8 lakhs. Compute his total income.

# SOLUTION

The total income of Mr. C comprises of agricultural income and business income.

|Total profits from the sale of latex|` 30 lakhs – ` 10 lakhs – ` 8 lakhs = ` 12 lakhs.|
|---|---|
|Agricultural income|65% of ` 12 lakhs = ` 7.8 lakhs|
|Business income|35% of ` 12 lakhs = ` 4.2 lakhs|

# (iii) Rule 7B – Income from growing and manufacturing of coffee

a) In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and cured by the seller in India, 25% profits on sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and gains from
# BASIC CONCEPTS

1.41 a business or profession”, and the balance 75% is agricultural income and is exempt.

b) In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India, with or without mixing chicory or other flavoring ingredients, 40% profits on sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is agricultural income and is exempt.

(iv) Rule 8 - Income from growing and manufacturing of tea - This rule applies only in cases where the assessee himself grows tea leaves and manufactures tea in India. In such cases 40% profits on sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is agricultural income and is exempt.

|Rule|Apportionment of Agricultural Business income in certain cases|Income|Income| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|7A|Income from sale of rubber products derived from rubber plant grown by the seller in India.|65%|35%| |
|7B|Income from sale of coffee|- grown and cured by the seller in India|75%|25%|
| |- grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India|60%|40%| |
|8|Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by the seller in India|60%|40%| |

(3) Income from farm building: Income from the farm building which is owned and occupied by the receiver of the rent or revenue of any such land or occupied by the cultivator or the receiver of rent in kind, of any land with respect to which, or the produce of which, any process discussed above is carried on, would be agricultural income.
# 1.42 INCOME TAX LAW

However, the income arising from the use of such farm building for any purpose (including letting for residential purpose or for the purpose of business or profession) other than agriculture referred in (1) & (2) of para 3.6 in page 1.35 would not be agricultural income.

Further, the income from such farm building would be agricultural income only if the following conditions are satisfied:

1. The building should be on or in the immediate vicinity of the land; and
2. The receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator or the receiver of rent in kind should, by reason of his connection with such land require it as a dwelling house or as a store house.

In addition to the above conditions any one of the following two conditions should also be satisfied:

1. The land should either be assessed to land revenue in India or be subject to a local rate assessed and collected by the officers of the Government as such or;
2. Where the land is not so assessed to land revenue in India or is not subject to local rate:

|Shortest aerial distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board|Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day referred to in item a.|
|---|---|
|(i) ≤ 2 kms|> 10,000|
|(ii) >2 kms but ≤ 6 kms|> 1,00,000|
|(iii) >6 kms but ≤ 8kms|> 10,00,000|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.43

Example:

|Area|Shortest distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board referred to in item a.|Population according to the last preceding census of which relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year|Would the income derived from farm building situated in this area be treated as agricultural income?|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) A|1 km|9,000|Yes|
|(ii) B|1.5 kms|12,000|No|
|(iii) C|2 kms|11,00,000|No|
|(iv) D|3 kms|80,000|Yes|
|(v) E|4 kms|3,00,000|No|
|(vi) F|5 kms|12,00,000|No|
|(vii) G|6 kms|8,000|Yes|
|(viii) H|7 kms|4,00,000|Yes|
|(ix) I|8 kms|10,50,000|No|
|(x) J|9 kms|15,00,000|Yes|

Would income arising from transfer of agricultural land situated in urban area be agricultural income?

No, as per Explanation 1 to section 2(1A), the capital gains arising from the transfer of urban agricultural land would not be treated as agricultural income under section 10 but will be taxable under section 45.

Example: Suppose A sells agricultural land situated in New Delhi for ` 10 lakhs and makes a surplus of ` 8 lakhs over its cost of acquisition. This surplus will not constitute agricultural income exempt under section 10(1) and will be taxable under section 45.

# Indirect connection with land

We have seen above that agricultural income is exempt, whether it is received by the tiller or the landlord. However, non-agricultural income does not become
# 1.44 INCOME TAX LAW

Agricultural merely on account of its indirect connection with the land. The following examples will illustrate the above point.

# Example 1

A rural society has as its principal business the selling on behalf of its member societies, butter made by these societies from cream sold to them by farmers. The making of butter was a factory process separated from the farm. The butter resulting from the factory operations separated from the farm was not an agricultural product and the society was, therefore, not entitled to exemption under section 10(1) in respect of such income.

# Example 2

X was the managing agent of a company. He was entitled for a commission at the rate of 10% p.a. on the annual net profits of the company. A part of the company’s income was agricultural income. X claimed that since his remuneration was calculated with reference to income of the company, part of which was agricultural income, such part of the commission as was proportionate to the agricultural income was exempt from income tax. Since, X received remuneration under a contract for personal service calculated on the amount of profits earned by the company; such remuneration does not constitute agricultural income.

# Example 3

Y owned 100 acres of agricultural land, a part of which was used as pasture for cows. The lands were purely maintained for manuring and other purposes connected with agriculture and only the surplus milk after satisfying the assessee’s needs was sold. The question arose whether income from such sale of milk was agricultural income. The regularity with which the sales of milk were effected and quantity of milk sold showed that the assessee carried on regular business of producing milk and selling it as a commercial proposition. Hence, it was not agricultural income.

# Example 4

In regard to forest trees of spontaneous growth which grow on the soil unaided by any human skill and labour there is no cultivation of the soil at all. Even though operations in the nature of forestry operations performed by the assessee may have the effect of nursing and fostering the growth of such forest trees, it cannot constitute agricultural operations. Income from the sale of such forest trees of spontaneous growth does not, therefore, constitute agricultural income.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.45

# Examples of Agricultural income and Non-agricultural income

For better understanding of the concept, certain examples of agricultural income and non-agricultural income are given below:

# Example: Agricultural income

- Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery.
- Income from growing of flowers and creepers.
- Rent received from land used for grazing of cattle required for agricultural activities.
- Income from growing of bamboo.

# Example: Non-agricultural income

- Income from breeding of livestock.
- Income from poultry farming.
- Income from fisheries.
- Income from dairy farming.

# 4. PREVIOUS YEAR AND ASSESSMENT YEAR

|Previous Year|Assessment Year|
|---|---|
|2023-24|2024-25|

# 4.1 Assessment year

The term has been defined under section 2(9). This means a period of 12 months commencing on 1ˢᵗ April every year. The year in which income is earned is the previous year and such income is taxable in the immediately following year which is the assessment year. Income earned in the previous year 2023-24 is taxable in the assessment year 2024-25.

Assessment year always starts from 1ˢᵗ April and it is always a period of 12 months.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.2 Previous year

The term has been defined under section 3. It means the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year. As mentioned earlier, the income earned during the previous year is taxable in the assessment year.

Business or profession newly set up during the financial year - In such a case, the previous year shall be the period beginning on the date of setting up of the business or profession and ending with 31st March of the said financial year.

If a source of income comes into existence in the said financial year, then, the previous year will commence from the date on which the source of income newly comes into existence and will end with 31st March of the financial year.

# Examples:

A is running a business from 1993 onwards. Determine the previous year for the assessment year 2024-25.

Ans. The previous year will be 1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024.

A chartered accountant sets up his profession on 1st July, 2023. Determine the previous year for the assessment year 2024-25.

Ans. The previous year will be from 1.7.2023 to 31.3.2024.

# 4.3 Certain cases when income of a previous year will be assessed in the previous year itself

# General Rule

Income of a previous year is assessed in the assessment year following the previous year.

# Exceptions to this rule

Shipping business of non-resident
Persons leaving India
AOP/ BOI/ Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or purpose
Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax
Discontinued business
# BASIC CONCEPTS

The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the assessment year following the previous year. For instance, income of previous year 2023-24 is assessed during 2024-25. Therefore, 2024-25 is the assessment year for assessment of income of the previous year 2023-24.

However, in a few cases, this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions have been made to protect the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as follows:

1. Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172]
Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship is allowed to leave the port only when the tax has been paid or satisfactory arrangement has been made for payment thereof. 7.5% of the freight paid or payable to the owner or the charterer or to any person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on account of such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the same year in which it is earned.
2. Persons leaving India [Section 174]
Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India during the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and he has no present intention of returning to India, the total income of such individual for the period from the expiry of the respective previous year up to the probable date of his departure from India is chargeable to tax in that assessment year.

Example: Suppose Mr. X is leaving India for USA on 10.6.2023 and it appears to the Assessing Officer that he has no intention to return. Before leaving India, Mr. X may be asked to pay income-tax on the income earned during the P.Y. 2022-23 as well as on the total income earned during the period 1.4.2023 to 10.06.2023.
3. AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or purpose [Section 174A]
If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or purpose and the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is likely to be dissolved in the same year or in the next year, he can make assessment of the income up to the date of dissolution as income of the relevant assessment year.
# 1.48 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iv) Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175]

During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing Officer that a person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his assets to avoid payment of any liability under this Act, the total income of such person for the period from the expiry of the previous year to the date, when the Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax in that assessment year.

# (v) Discontinued business [Section 176]

Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment year, the income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up to the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in that assessment year.

# 5. UNDISCLOSED SOURCES OF INCOME

|Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi|Cash [Section 69D]|Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C]|
|---|---|---|
|Unexplained Investments [Section 69]|Undisclosed sources of income|Investment etc. not fully disclosed|
|Unexplained money [Section 69A]| | |

# (i) Cash Credits [Section 68]

Where any sum is found credited in the books of an assessee maintained for any previous year and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the sum so credited may be charged as income of the assessee of that previous year.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.49

Unexplained loan or borrowing - Where the sum so credited consists of loan or borrowing or any such amount, by whatever name called, any explanation offered by the assessee in whose books such sum is credited shall not be deemed to be satisfactory, unless -

- the person in whose name such credit is recorded in the books of such assessee also offers an explanation about the nature and source of such sum so credited; and
- such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to be satisfactory.

Unexplained Share Capital/ Premium - Any explanation offered by a closely held company in respect of any sum credited as share application money, share capital, share premium or any such amount, by whatever name called, in the accounts of such company shall be deemed to be not satisfactory, unless

- the person, being a resident, in whose name such credit is recorded in the books of such company also explains about the nature and the source of such sum so credited and
- such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to be satisfactory.

Non-applicability to Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company – These additional conditions would not apply if the person, in whose name the sum is recorded, is a Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company registered with SEBI.

# (ii) Unexplained Investments [Section 69]

Where in the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year, the assessee has made investments which are not recorded in the books of account and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and the source of investments or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the value of the investments are taxed as deemed income of the assessee of such financial year.

# (iii) Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A]

Where in any financial year the assessee is found to be the owner of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the same is not recorded in the books of account and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source of acquisition of such money, bullion etc. or the explanation offered is not satisfactory.
# 1.50 INCOME TAX LAW

In the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the money and the value of bullion etc. may be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year.

# (iv) Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account [Section 69B]

Where in any financial year the assessee has made investments or is found to be the owner of any bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the Assessing Officer finds that the amount spent on making such investments or in acquiring such articles exceeds the amount recorded in the books of account maintained by the assessee and he offers no explanation for the difference or the explanation offered is unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, such excess may be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year.

Example: If the assessee is found to be the owner of say 300 gms of gold (market value of which is ` 25,000) during the financial year ending 31.3.2024 but he has recorded to have spent ` 15,000 in acquiring it, the Assessing Officer can add ` 10,000 (i.e., the difference of the market value of such gold and ` 15,000) as the income of the assessee, if the assessee offers no satisfactory explanation thereof.

# (v) Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C]

Where in any financial year an assessee has incurred any expenditure and he offers no explanation about the source of such expenditure or the explanation is unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, Assessing Officer can treat such unexplained expenditure as the income of the assessee for such financial year. Such unexplained expenditure which is deemed to be the income of the assessee shall not be allowed as deduction under any head of income.

# (vi) Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D]

Where any amount is borrowed on a hundi or any amount due thereon is repaid other than through an account-payee cheque drawn on a bank, the amount so borrowed or repaid shall be deemed to be the income of the person borrowing or repaying for the previous year in which the amount was borrowed or repaid, as the case may be. However, where any amount borrowed on a hundi has been deemed to be the income of any person, he will not be again liable to be assessed in respect of such amount on repayment of such amount. The amount repaid shall include interest paid on the amount borrowed.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 6. RATES OF TAX, SURCHARGE & CESS

Income-tax is to be charged on every person at the rates prescribed for the year by the Annual Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both.

# Surcharge

Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax. Under the normal provisions of the Act, surcharge is presently being levied beyond a particular threshold of income for different persons. Also, higher rates of surcharge are prescribed for higher thresholds of income. Under the special tax regimes for domestic companies and co-operative societies, a uniform surcharge is prescribed irrespective of the level of total income.

# “Health and Education cess” on Income-tax

The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable, should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the “Health and Education cess on income-tax”, calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax and surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of all assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOPs/BOIs, Artificial Juridical Persons, firms, local authorities, co-operative societies and companies.

It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary and higher education.

# 6.1 Individual/Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/Association of Persons (AOP)/Body of Individuals (BOI)/Artificial Juridical Person

# Income-tax

Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and Artificial Juridical Persons can pay tax at concessional rates under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. However, he/it has to forego certain exemptions and deductions under this regime. Alternatively, they can exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions of the Act at the tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# Default tax regime under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961

# I. Concessional tax rates

Individuals/ HUF/ AoPs/ BoIs or artificial judicial persons, other than those who exercise the option to opt out this regime under section 115BAC(6), have to pay tax in respect of their total income (other than income chargeable to tax at special rates under Chapter XII such as section 111A, 112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ etc.) at the following concessional rates, subject to certain conditions specified under section 115BAC(2) –

|(i)|Upto ` 3,00,000|NIL|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|From ` 3,00,001 to ` 6,00,000|5%|
|(iii)|From ` 6,00,001 to ` 9,00,000|10%|
|(iv)|From ` 9,00,001 to ` 12,00,000|15%|
|(v)|From ` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000|20%|
|(vii)|Above ` 15,00,000|30%|

# II. Conditions to be satisfied

The following are the conditions to be satisfied:

|S. No.|Particulars|
|---|---|
|(1)|Certain deductions/exemptions not allowable: Section 115BAC(2) provides that while computing total income, the following deductions/exemptions would not be allowed:|

|Section|Exemption/Deduction|
|---|---|
|10(5)|Leave travel concession|
|10(13A)|House rent allowance|
|10(14)|Exemption in respect of special allowances or benefit to meet expenses relating to duties or personal expenses (other than those as may be prescribed for this purpose)|
|10(17)|Daily allowance or constituency allowance of MPs and MLAs|
|10(32)|Exemption in respect of income of minor child included in the income of parent|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.53

# 10AA

Tax holiday for units established in SEZ

# 16

(i) Entertainment allowance

(ii) Professional tax

# 24(b)

Interest on loan in respect of self-occupied property

# 32(1)(iia)

Additional depreciation

# 35(1)(ii),(iia),(iii)

Deduction in respect of contribution to

or 35(2AA) - notified approved research association/ university/college/other institutions for scientific research [Section 35(1)(ii)]

- approved Indian company for scientific research [Section 35(1)(iia)]

- notified approved research association/ university/college/other institutions for research in social science or statistical research [Section 35(1)(iii)]

- An approved National laboratory/university/IIT/ specified person for scientific research undertaken under an approved programme [Section 35(2AA)]

# 35AD

Investment linked tax incentives for specified businesses

# 80C to 80U

Deductions under Chapter VI-A (other than employers contribution towards NPS under section 80CCD(2), Central Government contribution towards Agnipath Scheme under section 80CCH(2) and deduction in respect of employment of new employees under section 80JJAA).

# (2) Certain losses not allowed to be set-off:

While computing total income, set-off of any loss -

(i) carried forward or depreciation from any earlier assessment year, if such loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the deductions referred to in (1) above; or

(ii) under the head house property with any other head of income; would not be allowed.
# 1.54 INCOME TAX LAW

# (3) Depreciation or additional depreciation:

Depreciation u/s 32 is to be determined in the prescribed manner. Depreciation in respect of any block of assets entitled to more than 40%, would be restricted to 40% on the written down value of such block of assets. Additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), however, cannot be claimed.

# (4) Exemption or deduction for allowances or perquisite:

While computing total income, any exemption or deduction for allowances or perquisite, by whatever name called, provided under any other law for the time being force in India would not be allowed.

# Additional points:

Total income under default tax regime should be computed without set-off of any loss brought forward or depreciation from any earlier assessment year, where such loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the deductions listed in (1) above. Such loss and depreciation would be deemed to have been already given effect to and no further deduction for such loss or depreciation shall be allowed for any subsequent year.

Where income-tax on total income of the assessee is computed under this section and there is a depreciation allowance in respect of a block of asset from an earlier assessment year attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), which has not been given full effect to prior to A.Y. 2024-25 and which is not allowed to be set-off in the A.Y.2024-25 due to section 115BAC, corresponding adjustment shall be made to the WDV of such block of assets as on 1.4.2023 in the prescribed manner i.e., the WDV as on 1.4.2023 will be increased by the unabsorbed additional depreciation not allowed to be set-off.

Example: Let us consider the case of Mr. X, who carries on business of manufacturing of steel. He has unabsorbed depreciation as on 1.4.2023, which includes amount attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) of P.Y.2022-23 or any earlier previous year in respect of block of plant and machinery. If he pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC for P.Y.2023-24 relevant to A.Y.2024-25, the amount so attributable to additional depreciation of earlier year remaining unabsorbed as on 1.4.2023 would not be eligible for set-off against current year income and no further deduction for such loss or depreciation shall be allowed for any subsequent year. Accordingly, the WDV of the block as on 1.4.2023 has to be increased by the said amount not allowed to be set-off.

# III. Time limit for exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime

# (i) In case of an assessee having no income from business or profession:

Where such individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person is not having
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Income from business or profession, he/it can exercise an option to shift out/opt out of the default tax regime under this section and such option has to be exercised along with the return of income to be furnished under section 139(1) for a previous year relevant to the assessment year. In effect, such individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person can choose whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime in each previous year. He may choose to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default tax regime in another year.

(ii) In case of an assessee having income from business or profession: Such individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person having income from business or profession has an option to shift out / opt out of the default tax regime under this section and the option has to be exercised on or before the due date specified under section 139(1) for furnishing the return of income for such previous year and once such option is exercised, it would apply to subsequent assessment years.

Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default tax regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only once and pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC for a previous year other than the year in which it was exercised. Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this section, except where such person ceases to have any business income in which case, option under (i) above would be available.

AMT liability not attracted: Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC is not liable to alternate minimum tax u/s 115JC. Such person would not be eligible to claim AMT credit also.

Note: It may be noted that in case of Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person not having income from business or profession, the total income and tax liability (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable under normal provisions) may be computed every year both in accordance with the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC, in order to determine which is more beneficial and accordingly such person may decide whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC or exercise the option to shift out and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act for that year.
# 1.56 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2023-24, comprising of income from house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y. 2024-25

|Tax liability:| |
|---|---|
|First ` 3,00,000|- Nil|
|Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 6,00,000|- @5% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 15,000|
|Next ` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000|- @10% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 30,000|
|Next ` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000|- @15% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 45,000|
|Next ` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000|- @20% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 60,000|
|Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 15,00,000|- @30% of ` 1,00,000 = ` 30,000|
| |= ` 1,80,000|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|= ` 7,200|
| |= ` 1,87,200|

# Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act for optional tax regime

The slab rates for A.Y. 2024-25 applicable to an Individual/HUF/AOP/BOI/ Artificial Juridical Person, which has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime, are as follows:

1. where the total income does not exceed ` 2,50,000 - NIL
2. where the total income exceeds ` 2,50,000 but does not exceed ` 5,00,000 - 5% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 2,50,000
3. where the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does not exceed ` 10,00,000 - ` 12,500 plus 20% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000
4. where the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000 - ` 1,12,500 plus 30% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000
# BASIC CONCEPTS

For a senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 and for a very senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is ` 5,00,000. Therefore, the tax slabs for these assessees would be as follows –

# For senior citizens (being resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more but less than 80 years)

|(i)|where the total income does not exceed ` 3,00,000|NIL|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|where the total income exceeds ` 3,00,000 but does not exceed ` 5,00,000|5% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 3,00,000|
|(iii)|where the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does not exceed ` 10,00,000|` 10,000 plus 20% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000|
|(iv)|where the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000|` 1,10,000 plus 30% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000|

# For resident individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year

|(i)|where the total income does not exceed ` 5,00,000|NIL|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|where the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does not exceed ` 10,00,000|20% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000|
|(iii)|where the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000|` 1,00,000 plus 30% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000|

Clarification regarding attaining prescribed age of 60 years/ 80 years on 31st March itself, in case of senior/very senior citizens whose date of birth falls on 1st April [Circular No. 28/2016, dated 27-07-2016]

The CBDT has clarified that a person born on 1st April would be considered to have attained a particular age on 31st March, the day preceding the anniversary of his birthday. In particular, the question of attainment of age of eligibility for being
# INCOME TAX LAW

considered a senior/very senior citizen would be decided on the basis of above criteria.

Therefore, a resident individual whose 60th birthday falls on 1st April, 2024, would be treated as having attained the age of 60 years in the P.Y.2023-24 and would be eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 3 lakh while computing his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. Likewise, a resident individual whose 80th birthday falls on 1st April, 2024, would be treated as having attained the age of 80 years in the P.Y.2023-24, and would be eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 5 lakh in computing his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.

In respect of certain types of income, as mentioned below, the Income-tax Act, 1961 has prescribed specific rates. The special rates of tax have to be applied on the respective component of total income irrespective of the tax regime and the slab rates have to be applied on the balance of total income after adjusting the basic exemption limit.

|S. No.|Section|Income|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|---|---|
|(a)|112|Long term capital gains (other than LTCG taxable as per section 112A)|20%|
|(b)|112A|Long term capital gains on transfer of –|10%|
| | |• Equity share in a company| |
| | |• Unit of an equity oriented fund| |
| | |• Unit of business trust| |

Condition for availing the benefit of this concessional rate is that securities transaction tax should have been paid –

|(Capital Asset)|Time of payment of STT|
|---|---|
|Equity shares in a company|both at the time of acquisition and transfer|
|Unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust|at the time of transfer|

Note: LTCG upto ` 1 lakh is exempt. LTCG exceeding ` 1 lakh is taxable @10%.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.59

# (c) 111A Short-term capital gains on transfer of –

15%

- Equity shares in a company
- Unit of an equity oriented fund
- Unit of business trust

The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate are –

1. The transaction of sale of such equity share or unit should be entered into on or after 1.10.2004; and
2. Such transaction should be chargeable to securities transaction tax.

# (d) 115BB Winnings from

30%

- Lotteries;
- Crossword puzzles;
- Races including horse races;
- Card games and other games of any sort;
- Gambling or betting of any form or nature (other than winning from any online game)

# (e) 115BBJ Net winnings from online games

30%

# (f) 115BBE Unexplained money, investment, expenditure, etc.

60%

deemed as income under section 68 or section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or section 69C or section 69D [See discussion below]

# Unexplained money, investments etc. to attract tax@60% [Section 115BBE]

1. In order to control laundering of unaccounted money by availing the benefit of basic exemption limit, the unexplained money, investment, expenditure, etc. deemed as income under section 68 or section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or section 69C or section 69D would be taxed at the rate of 60% plus surcharge @25% of tax. Thus, the effective rate of tax (including surcharge @25% of tax and cess @4% of tax and surcharge) is 78%.
2. No basic exemption or allowance or expenditure shall be allowed to the assessee under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in computing such deemed income.
# 1.60 INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Further, no set off of any loss shall be allowable against income brought to tax under sections 68 or section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or section 69C or section 69D.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2023-24, comprising of income from house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 assuming his age is –

- (a) 45 years
- (b) 63 years
- (c) 82 years

Assume that Mr. X has exercised the option to shift out/ opt out of the default tax regime.

# (a) Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 45 years)

Tax liability:

|First ` 2,50,000|- Nil|
|---|---|
|Next ` 2,50,001 – ` 5,00,000|- @5% of ` 2,50,000 = ` 12,500|
|Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000|- @20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000|
|Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000|- @30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000|
| |= ` 2,92,500|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|= ` 11,700|
| |= ` 3,04,200|

# (b) Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 63 years)

Tax liability:

|First ` 3,00,000|- Nil|
|---|---|
|Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 5,00,000|- @5% of ` 2,00,000 = ` 10,000|
|Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000|- @20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.61

Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000

= ` 2,90,000

Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 11,600

= ` 3,01,600

# (c) Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 82 years)

Tax liability:

First ` 5,00,000 - Nil

Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 - @ 20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000

Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @ 30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000

= ` 2,80,000

Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 11,200

= ` 2,91,200

# Surcharge

In case the Individual/HUF/AoP⁴/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

Income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC and/ or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be increased by surcharge given under the following table:

|Particulars|Rate of surcharge on income-tax|Example Components of total income|Applicable rate of surcharge|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|10%|Example|Surcharge would be levied @10% on income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore.|

4 (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members)
# INCOME TAX LAW

# LTCG u/s 112A

₹ 20 lakhs; and

# Other income

₹ 25 lakhs

# Where total income

15%

# Example

- Dividend income ₹ 10 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A ₹ 35 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112 ₹ 50 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ₹ 35 lakhs; and
- Other income ₹ 55 lakhs

# Where total income

25%

# Example

- Dividend income ₹ 51 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A ₹ 44 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112 ₹ 42 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ₹ 55 lakhs; and
- Other income ₹ 6 crores

The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A is 15%.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Surcharge @ 25% would be leviable on income-tax computed on other income of ` 6 crores included in total income.

# (iv) Where total income > ` 2 crore

(including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)

Example

- Dividend income ` 40 lakhs; Surcharge would be levied @ 15%
- STCG u/s 111A on income-tax ` 35 lakhs; computed on total income of ` 2.77 crore.
- LTCG u/s 112 ` 42 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ` 50 lakhs; and
- Other income ` 1.10 crore

# Marginal relief

The purpose of marginal relief is to ensure that the increase in amount of tax payable (including surcharge) due to increase in total income of an assessee beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the amount of increase in total income.

Marginal relief is available in case of such persons paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC referred to in above i.e.,

|Particulars|Marginal relief|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge @ 10% on such income-tax (A) Step 2 - Compute income-tax on ` 50 lakhs Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (B)|

# 1.64 INCOME TAX LAW

Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B). Consequently, if A &gt; B, the marginal relief would be A – B.

# (ii) Where the total income &gt; ` 1 crore but ≤ ` 2 crores

Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C)

Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1 crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%

Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 1 crore

Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (D)

Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., C) or Step 4 (i.e., D). Consequently, if C &gt; D, the marginal relief would be C – D.

# (iii) Where the total income &gt; ` 2 crores

Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E)

Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2 crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15%

Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 2 crore

Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (F)

Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F). Consequently, if E &gt; F, the marginal relief would be E – F.

Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A.

In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A, surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in cases referred to in (iii) above.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

In case the Individual/HUF/AoP⁵/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, income-tax computed in accordance with normal provisions of the Act or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be increased by surcharge given under the following table:

|Particulars|Rate of surcharge on income-tax|Components of total income|Applicable rate of surcharge|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|10%|- Dividend ` 10 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A ` 20 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112 ` 15 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ` 20 lakhs;
- Other income ` 25 lakhs
|Surcharge would be levied @10% on income-tax computed on total income of ` 90 lakhs.|
|(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1 crore but ≤ ` 2 crore|15%|- Dividend income ` 10 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A ` 40 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112 ` 55 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ` 35 lakhs;
- Other income ` 50 lakhs
|Surcharge would be levied @15% on income-tax computed on total income of ` 1.90 crores.|
|(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore|25%|- Dividend income ` 51 lakhs;
|Surcharge @15% would be levied on income-tax on:|

# INCOME TAX LAW

a 1.66

|Income|Rate of Surcharge|Details|
|---|---|---|
|≤ ` 2 crore but ≤ ` 5 crore|15%|- STCG u/s 111A: ` 44 lakhs;
- Dividend income of ` 51 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112: ` 55 lakh;
- Other income ` 3 crores
|
|Where total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 5 crore|37%|- Dividend income: ` 60 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A: ` 50 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112: ` 42 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A: ` 25 lakhs;
- Other income: ` 6 crore
|

Surcharge@25% would be leviable on income-tax computed on other income of ` 3 crores included in total income.

Surcharge@15% would be levied on income-tax on:

- Dividend income of ` 60 lakhs;
- STCG of ` 50 lakhs chargeable to tax u/s 111A;
- LTCG of ` 42 lakhs chargeable to tax u/s 112;
- LTCG of ` 25 lakhs chargeable to tax u/s 112A.

Surcharge@37% would be leviable on the income-tax.
# BASIC CONCEPTS

computed on other income of ` 6 crores included in total income.

# (v) Where total income

(including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered under (iii) and (iv) above

- Dividend income ` 55 lakhs;
- STCG u/s 111A ` 60 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112 ` 42 lakhs;
- LTCG u/s 112A ` 35 lakhs; and
- Other income ` 1.10 crore

# Marginal relief

Marginal relief in case of such persons referred to in above under the optional tax regime (as per the normal provisions of the Act).

|Particulars|Marginal relief|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@10% on such income-tax (A) Step 2 - Compute income-tax on ` 50 lakhs Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (B) Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B). Consequently, if A>B, the marginal relief would be A – B.|
|(ii) Where the total income > ` 1 crore but ≤ ` 2 crores|Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C) Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1 crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%|

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1.68

# (iii) Where the total income > ` 2 crores but ≤ ` 5 crores

|Step 1|Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E)|
|---|---|
|Step 2|Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2 crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15%|
|Step 3|Total income (-) ` 2 crore|
|Step 4|Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (F)|
|Step 5|Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F). Consequently, if E>F, the marginal relief would be E – F.|

# (iv) Where the total income > ` 5 crores

|Step 1|Compute income-tax on total income; and add surcharge@37% on income-tax (G)|
|---|---|
|Step 2|Compute income-tax on total income of ` 5 crore + surcharge on such income-tax@25%|
|Step 3|Total income (-) ` 5 crore|
|Step 4|Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 3 (H)|
|Step 5|Income-tax liability on total income (along with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., G) or Step 4 (i.e., H). Consequently, if G>H, the marginal relief would be G – H.|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A.

In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A, surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in cases referred to in (iii) and (iv) above.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Compute the tax liability of Mr. A (aged 42), having total income of ` 51 lakhs for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. Assume that Mr. A has exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC.

# SOLUTION

|Computation of tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y.2024-25| |
|---|---|
|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000| |
|` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5%|` 12,500|
|` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @20%|` 1,00,000|
|` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000 @30%|` 12,30,000|
|Total|` 13,42,500|
|Add: Surcharge @ 10%|` 1,34,250|
| |` 14,76,750|
|(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs| |
|(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000)|` 13,12,500|
|(C) Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs|` 1,00,000|
|(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B +C)|` 14,12,500|
|(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D)|` 14,12,500|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 56,500|
|Tax liability (including cess)|` 14,69,000|
|(F) Marginal Relief (A – D)|` 64,250|

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Alternative method -

|(A)|Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
| |` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000@5%|` 12,500|
| |` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20%|` 1,00,000|
| |` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000@30%|` 12,30,000|
|Total| |` 13,42,500|
|Add: Surcharge@10%| |` 1,34,250|
| | |` 14,76,750|

|(B)|Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs| |
|---|---|---|
| |(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000)|` 13,12,500|

|(C)|Excess tax payable (A)-(B)|` 1,64,250|
|---|---|---|
|(D)|Marginal Relief (` 1,64,250 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 50,00,000)|` 64,250|
|(E)|Tax liability (A)-(D)|` 14,12,500|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%| |` 56,500|
|Tax liability (including cess)| |` 14,69,000|

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Compute the tax liability of Mr. B (aged 51) under the default tax regime, having total income of ` 1,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. B for the A.Y. 2024 -25

|(A)|Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 1,01,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
| |` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000@5%|` 15,000|
| |` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000@10%|` 30,000|
| |` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15%|` 45,000|
| |` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20%|` 60,000|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

1.71
a
|15,00,001 – 1,01,00,000@30%|25,80,000|
|---|---|
|Total|27,30,000|
|Add: Surcharge@15%|4,09,500|
|Tax liability without marginal relief|31,39,500|

# (B) Income-tax computed on total income of 1 crore

|(1,50,000 plus 25,50,000)|27,00,000|
|---|---|
|Add: Surcharge@10%|2,70,000|
| |29,70,000|

# (C) Total Income Less 1 crore

1,00,000
# (D) Income-tax computed on total income of 1 crore plus the excess of total income over 1 crore (B + C)

30,70,000
# (E) Tax liability: lower of (A) & (D)

| |30,70,000|
|---|---|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|1,22,800|
|Tax liability (including cess)|31,92,800|

# (F) Marginal relief (A-D)

69,500
# Alternative method:

|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of 1,01,00,000| | |
|---|---|---|
|3,00,000 – 6,00,000@5%|15,000| |
|6,00,001 – 9,00,000@10%| |30,000|
|9,00,001 – 12,00,000@15%|45,000| |
|12,00,001 – 15,00,000@20%|60,000| |
|15,00,001 – 1,01,00,000@30%| |25,80,000|
|Total| |27,30,000|
|Add: Surcharge @ 15%|4,09,500|31,39,500|

# (B) Income-tax computed on total income of 1 crore

[ (1,50,000 plus 25,50,000) plus surcharge@10% ]
29,70,000
# (C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B)

1,69,500
# INCOME TAX LAW

|(D)|Marginal Relief (` 1,69,500 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000)|` 69,500|
|---|---|---|
|(E)|Tax liability (A) - (D)|` 30,70,000|
| |Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 1,22,800|
| |Tax liability (including cess)|` 31,92,800|

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Compute the tax liability of Mr. C (aged 58), having total income of ` 2,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. Assume that Mr. C has exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. C for the A.Y. 2024-25

|(A)|Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 2,01,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
| |` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5%|` 12,500|
| |` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20%|` 1,00,000|
| |` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000 @ 30%|` 57,30,000|
| |Total|` 58,42,500|
| |Add: Surcharge @ 25%|` 14,60,625|
| | |` 73,03,125|
|(B)|Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore| |
| |(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000)|` 58,12,500|
| |Add: Surcharge @ 15%|` 8,71,875|
| | |` 66,84,375|
|(C)|Total Income Less ` 2 crore|` 1,00,000|
|(D)|Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore plus the excess of total income over ` 2 crore (B + C)|` 67,84,375|
|(E)|Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower|` 67,84,375|
| |Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 2,71,375|
| |Tax liability (including cess)|` 70,55,750|
|(F)|Marginal relief (A-D)|` 5,18,750|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.73

# Alternative method

|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of|` 2,01,00,000|
|---|---|
|` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5%|` 12,500|
|` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20%|` 1,00,000|
|` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000 @ 30%|` 57,30,000|
|Total|` 58,42,500|
|Add: Surcharge @ 25%|` 14,60,625|
| |` 73,03,125|

|(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore|[(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000) plus surcharge @ 15%]|` 66,84,375|
|---|---|---|
|(C) Excess tax payable (A) - (B)| |` 6,18,750|
|(D) Marginal Relief (` 6,18,750 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 2,00,00,000)| |` 5,18,750|
|(E) Tax liability (A) - (D)| |` 67,84,375|
|Add: Health and education cess @ 4%| |` 2,71,375|
|Tax liability (including cess)| |` 70,55,750|

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Compute the tax liability of Mr. D (aged 65) in a most beneficial manner. He is having total income of ` 5,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit and is the same under both tax regimes.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under default tax regime for the A.Y. 2024-25

| |Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 5,01,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
|` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @ 5%|` 15,000| |
|` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 @ 10%|` 30,000| |
|` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @ 15%|` 45,000| |

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Income Range|Tax Rate|Tax Amount|
|---|---|---|
|12,00,001 – 15,00,000|20%|60,000|
|15,00,001 – 5,01,00,000|30%|1,45,80,000|
|Total| |1,47,30,000|
|Add: Surcharge|25%|36,82,500|
| | |1,84,12,500|
|Add: Health and education cess|4%|7,36,500|
|Tax liability| |1,91,49,000|

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under optional tax regime for the A.Y. 2024-25

|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of|5,01,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
|3,00,000 – 5,00,000|5%|10,000|
|5,00,001 – 10,00,000|20%|1,00,000|
|10,00,001 – 5,01,00,000|30%|1,47,30,000|
|Total| |1,48,40,000|
|Add: Surcharge|37%|54,90,800|
| | |2,03,30,800|
|(B) Income-tax computed on total income of|5 crore| |
|(10,000 plus 1,00,000 plus 1,47,00,000)| |1,48,10,000|
|Add: Surcharge|25%|37,02,500|
| | |1,85,12,500|
|(C) Total Income Less|5 crore|1,00,000|
|(D) Income-tax computed on total income of 5 crore plus the excess of total income over 5 crore (B + C)| |1,86,12,500|
|(E) Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower| |1,86,12,500|
|Add: Health and education cess|4%|7,44,500|
|Tax liability (including cess)| |1,93,57,000|
|(F) Marginal Relief (A – D)| |17,18,300|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

# 1.75

# Alternative method

|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of|` 5,01,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
|` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000@5%|` 10,000| |
|` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20%|` 1,00,000| |
|` 10,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30%|` 1,47,30,000| |
|Total|` 1,48,40,000| |
|Add: Surcharge @ 37%|` 54,90,800| |
| | |` 2,03,30,800|
|(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore|[(` 10,000 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 1,47,00,000) plus surcharge@25%]|` 1,85,12,500|
|(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B)| |` 18,18,300|
|(D) Marginal Relief (` 18,18,300 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 5,00,00,000)| |` 17,18,300|
|(E) Tax liability (A) - (D)| |` 1,86,12,500|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%| |` 7,44,500|
|Tax liability (including cess)| |` 1,93,57,000|

It is beneficial for Mr. D to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, since his tax liability would be lower by ` 2,08,000 (` 1,93,57,000 - ` 1,91,49,000).

# 6.2 Firm/ LLP/ Local Authority

Income-tax

On the whole of the total income 30%

Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be applicable to Firm/ LLP/ local authority also.

Surcharge

Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 12% of income-tax computed as above.
# 1.76 INCOME TAX LAW

# Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such persons having a total income exceeding ` 1 crore i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.

# 6.3 Co-operative Society

# Income-tax rates as per the normal provisions of the Act

|(i)|Where the total income does not exceed ` 10,000|10% of the total income|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|Where the total income exceeds ` 10,000 but does not exceed ` 20,000|` 1,000 plus 20% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 10,000|
|(iii)|Where the total income exceeds ` 20,000|` 3,000 plus 30% of the amount by which the total income exceeds ` 20,000|

Note – A manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for concessional rates of tax under section 115BAE and other co-operative societies, resident in India, can opt for concessional rates of tax under section 115BAD.

# Tax rate in case of a manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India (set up and registered on or after 1.4.2023 and commences manufacture of article or thing before 31.3.2024) opting for concessional tax regime u/s 115BAE

15% of income derived from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an article or thing

# Tax rate in case of other resident co-operative society opting for concessional tax regime u/s 115BAD:

22% of total income

Note - Co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for concessional rate of tax u/s 115BAD or 115BAE, as the case may be, subject to certain conditions. The total income of such co-operative societies would be computed without giving effect to deduction under section 10AA, 33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35AD, 35CCC, additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia), deductions under Chapter VI-A (other than section 80JJAA) etc. and set off of loss and depreciation brought forward from earlier years relating to the above deductions. The provisions of
# BASIC CONCEPTS

alternate minimum tax under section 115JC would not be applicable to a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or 115BAE. This section will be dealt with in detail at Final level.

Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be applicable to Co-operative society also.

# Surcharge

(a) In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore

Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance with the slab rates given above and/or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A.

# Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.

(b) In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income is > ` 10 crore

Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the slab rates given above and/or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A.

# Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore.
# 1.78 INCOME TAX LAW

(c) In case of a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAD or section 115BAE would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability of surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief.

# 6.4 Domestic Company

|Income-tax| |
|---|---|
|If the total turnover or gross receipt in the P.Y.2021-22 ≤ ` 400 crore|25% of the total income|
|In any other case|30% of the total income|

# Notes –

- In case of a domestic manufacturing company (set up and registered on or after 1.10.2019 and commences manufacture of article or thing6 before 31.3.2024) exercising option u/s 115BAB: 15% of income derived from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an article or thing
- In case of a domestic company exercising option u/s 115BAA: 22% of total income

Domestic company can opt for section 115BAA or section 115BAB, as the case may be, subject to certain conditions. The total income of such companies would be computed without giving effect to deductions under section 10AA, 33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35(2AB), 35AD, 35CCC, 35CCD, Chapter VI-A (except section 80JJAA or section 80M), additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia) etc. and without set-off of brought forward loss and unabsorbed depreciation attributable to such deductions. These sections will be dealt with in detail at Final Level.

Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be applicable to domestic company also.

# Surcharge

(a) In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore
# BASIC CONCEPTS

Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.

# Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.

# (b) In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income is > ` 10 crore

Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.

# Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore.

# (c) In case of a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section 115BAB

Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAA or section 115BAB would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability of surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief.

# 6.5 Foreign Company

# Income-tax

Royalties and fees for rendering technical services (FTS) received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement, approved by the Central Government, made by the company with the Government or Indian concern between 1.4.1961 and 31.3.1976 (in case of royalties) and between 1.3.1964 and 31.3.1976 (in case of FTS)

Other income 40%
# 1.80 INCOME TAX LAW

Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be applicable to foreign company also.

# Surcharge

(a) In case of a foreign company, whose total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore

Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 2% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.

Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.

(b) In case of a foreign company, whose total income is > ` 10 crore

Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 5% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.

Marginal Relief

Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore.

# 7. REBATE FOR RESIDENT INDIVIDUALS [SECTION 87A]

In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax payers, section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an individual resident in India.

Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC

(i) If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 7,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 25,000, whichever is less.

The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of
# BASIC CONCEPTS

income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of the assessee with which he is chargeable for any assessment year.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. Raghav aged 26 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 6,50,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# SOLUTION

Computation of tax liability of Mr. Raghav for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ` 6,50,000| |
|Tax@10%of ` 50,000 + ` 15,000|20,000|
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ` 25,000)|20,000|
|Tax Liability|Nil|

(ii) If total income of such individual exceeds ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of ` 7,00,000, the rebate would be as follows.

1. Step 1 – Total income (-) ` 7 lakhs (A)
2. Step 2 - Compute income-tax liability on total income (B)
3. Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B – A.

The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of the assessee.

# ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. Pawan aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 7,15,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime under section 115BAC.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Pawan for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Step 1: Total Income of ₹ 7,15,000 - ₹ 7,00,000|15,000 (A)|
|Step 2: Tax on total income of ₹ 7,15,000|Tax@10% of ₹ 1,15,000 + ₹ 15,000|
| |26,500 (B)|
|Step 3: Since B>A, rebate u/s 87A would be B-A|[₹ 26,500 - ₹ 15,000]|
| |11,500|
| |15,000|
|Add: HEC@4%|600|
|Tax Liability|15,600|

Rebate to a resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act) If total income of such individual does not exceed ₹ 5,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any assessment year or an amount of ₹ 12,500, whichever is less. The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of the assessee with which he is chargeable for any assessment year.

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. Piyush, aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ₹ 4,15,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 if he exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Piyush for A.Y. 2024 -25

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ₹ 4,15,000|Tax@5% of ₹ 1,65,000|
| |8,250|
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ₹ 12,500)|8,250|
|Tax Liability|Nil|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

Rebate under section 87A is allowed from income-tax computed before adding Health and education cess on income-tax.

Rebate under section 87A is, however, not available in respect of tax payable @10% on long-term capital gains taxable u/s 112A.

# PARTIAL INTEGRATION OF AGRICULTURAL INCOME WITH NON-AGRICULTURAL INCOME

Agricultural income is exempt subject to conditions mentioned in the definition given under section 2(1A). However, a method has been laid down to levy tax on agricultural income in an indirect way. This concept is known as partial integration of agricultural income with non-agricultural income. It is applicable to individuals, HUF, AOPs, BOIs and artificial juridical persons. Two conditions which need to be satisfied for partial integration are:

1. The net agricultural income should exceed ` 5,000 p.a., and
2. Non-agricultural income should exceed the maximum amount not chargeable to tax. (i.e., If such person is paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC, then ` 3,00,000 is the basic exemption limit irrespective of the age of the person. If such person has exercised the option to shift out of the default tax regime, then, the basic exemption limit would be ` 5,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year, ` 3,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more (but less than 80 years) at any time during the previous year and ` 2,50,000 for all others). Only if non-agricultural income exceeds this limit, partial integration would be required.

It may be noted that aggregation provisions do not apply to company, LLP, firm, co-operative society and local authority. The object of aggregating the net agricultural income with non-agricultural income is to tax the non-agricultural income at higher rates.

Tax calculation in such cases is as follows:

Step 1: Add non-agricultural income with net agricultural income. Compute tax on the aggregate amount.
# 1.84 INCOME TAX LAW

Step 2: Add net agricultural income and the basic exemption limit available to the assessee. Compute tax on the aggregate amount.

Step 3: Deduct the amount of income tax calculated in step 2 from the income tax calculated in step 1 i.e., Step 1 – Step 2.

Step 4: The sum so arrived at shall be –

- increased by surcharge, if applicable,
- reduced by the rebate, if any, available u/s 87A.

Step 5: Thereafter, it would be increased by health and education cess @4%.

The above concept can be clearly understood with the help of the following illustration:
# BASIC CONCEPTS

# LET US RECAPITULATE

Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List i.e., List I of Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of India has given the power to Parliament to make laws on taxes on income other than agricultural income.

# Components of income-tax law

- Income-tax Act, 1961 – governs the levy of income-tax in India.
- Income-tax Rules, 1962 – formulated for proper administration of the Act.
- Annual Finance Act – Amendments in the Income-tax Act, 1961 are effected every year through the Annual Finance Act.
- Circulars – issued by CBDT to clarify the meaning and scope of certain provisions of the Act.
- Notifications – issued to give effect to the provisions of the Act/ make or amend Rules.
- Court decisions – interprets the various provisions of income-tax law.

Income-tax is a TAX levied on the TOTAL INCOME of the PREVIOUS YEAR of every PERSON.

# (1) Total Income

Total income has to be computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. The following steps has to be followed for computing the total income of an assessee:

1. Step 1 – Determination of residential status
2. Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads
3. Step 3 – Computation of income under each head after providing for permissible deductions/ exemptions.

In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax under the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under the normal provisions of the Act are not permissible under the default tax regime.
# INCOME TAX LAW

1. Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.
2. Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses
3. Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income
4. Step 7 – Providing Deductions from Gross Total Income

Here again, only very select deductions, namely, 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and 80JJAA, are allowable under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

Step 8 – Computation of Total income
Step 9 - Application of the rates of tax on the total income

For default tax regime, concessional tax rates are provided under section 115BAC. For optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act, the tax rates are provided in the Annual Finance Act. The special rates u/s 111A, 112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ, etc. would apply under both tax regimes.

Step 10 – Add Surcharge, if applicable/ Deduct Rebate under section 87A, if applicable
Step 11 – Add Health and education cess on income-tax
Step 12 – Compute Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT), if applicable, [under the optional tax regime]
Step 13 - Examine whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC or pay tax under the regular provisions of the Act, by comparing the tax liability under both regimes.
Step 14 – Deduct Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source
Step 15 – The resultant figure would be Tax Payable/Tax Refundable

(2) Person: A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), Association of Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc.

(3) Concept of Previous year (P.Y.) and Assessment Year (A.Y.): Previous year is the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year i.e., it is the financial year ending on 31ˢᵗ March, in which the income has accrued/received.

In case of a newly set-up business, the previous year would be the period beginning with the date of setting up of the business or profession or, as the
# BASIC CONCEPTS

case may be, the date on which the source of income newly came into existence, and ending on 31ˢᵗ March.

# Assessment year (A.Y.):

Assessment year means the period of twelve months commencing on the 1ˢᵗ April every year.

# Exceptions to the rule that income is charged to income-tax in the Assessment Year following the previous year:

The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the assessment year following the previous year. However, in the following cases, this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the previous year in which it is earned.

1. Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172]
2. Persons leaving India [Section 174]
3. AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or purpose [Section 174A]
4. Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175]
5. Discontinued business [Section 176]

# Rate of tax for Undisclosed Sources of Income:

The following undisclosed incomes are chargeable to tax @78% [i.e., 60% plus surcharge @25% plus cess @4%] as specified under section 115BBE:

1. Cash Credits [Section 68]
2. Unexplained Investments [Section 69]
3. Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A]
4. Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account [Section 69B]
5. Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C]
6. Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D]

# Tax liability:

Tax has to be computed by applying the rates of tax mentioned in the Annual Finance Act and the rate specified under the Income-tax Act, 1961, as the case may be.
# INCOME TAX LAW

If an Individual/ Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/ Association of Persons (AOP)/ Body of Individuals (BOI)/ Artificial Juridical Person is paying tax under default tax regime, concessional tax rates are prescribed under section 115BAC. However, if he/it exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year would apply.

# Persons

|Individual/HUF/AOP/BOI/ Artificial Juridical Person|Total income (in `)|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|---|
|Under default tax regime|Upto ` 3,00,000|Nil|
| |` 3,00,001 to ` 6,00,000|5%|
| |` 6,00,001 to ` 9,00,000|10%|
| |` 9,00,001 to ` 12,00,000|15%|
| |` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000|20%|
| |Above ` 15,00,000|30%|

# Individual (As per the normal provisions of the Act under the optional tax regime)

|Total income (in `)|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years)|Nil|
|(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or above but less than 80 years and resident in India)|Nil|
|(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years and resident in India)|Nil|
|` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in cases (i) and (ii) above, respectively]|5%|
|` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 10,00,000|30%|

# HUF/AOP/BOI/ Artificial Juridical Person (As per the normal provisions of the Act under the optional tax regime)

|Total income (in `)|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 2,50,000|Nil|
|` 2,50,001 to ` 5,00,000|5%|
|` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 10,00,000|30%|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

|Firm/LLP/local authority|30%|
|---|---|
|Co-operative Society (not opting for the provisions of section 115BAD)|Total income (in `)|
|Upto ` 10,000|10%|
|` 10,001 to ` 20,000|20%|
|Above ` 20,000|30%|
|Company (not opting for the provisions of section 115BAA/115BAB)| |
|Domestic Company|Foreign Company|
|Total turnover or gross receipts in the P.Y. 2021-22 ≤ ` 400 crore|25%|
| |30%|
| |40%|

# Surcharge

# Under the default tax regime

Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person

1. Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore
10%
2. Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore
15%
3. Where the total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore
25%

Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A exceeding 15%
4. Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) above
15%
# INCOME TAX LAW

Under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

|Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person|Rate|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore|10%|
|(ii) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore|15%|
|(iii) - Where the total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore but is ≤ ` 5 crore|25%|
|- Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains exceeding chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A|Not 15%|
|(iv) - Where the total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 5 crore|37%|
|- Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains exceeding chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A|Not 15%|
|(v) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) and (iv) above|15%|

In case of an AOP of only companies as members

|Rate| |
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income > ` 50 lakh but is < ` 1 crore|10%|
|(ii) Where the total income > ` 1 crore|15%|

Firm/Limited Liability Partnership/Local Authorities

Where the total income > ` 1 crore
12%
Co-operative societies (other than a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section 115BBE)

Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore
7%
# BASIC CONCEPTS

|Total income is > ` 10 crore| | |12%|
|---|---|---|---|
|Domestic company (other than a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section 115BAB)|Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore| |7%|
|Total income is > ` 10 crore| | |12%|
|Foreign company|Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore| |2%|
|Total income is > ` 10 crore| | |5%|

# Rebate under section 87A:

# Under default tax regime

(i) Where total income ≤ ` 7,00,000 - Rebate of up to ` 25,000 for resident individuals.

(ii) Where total income > ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of ` 7,00,000 - Rebate of tax on total income as reduced by the total income exceeding ` 7,00,000 for resident individuals.

# Under normal provisions of the Act

Rebate of up to ` 12,500 for resident individuals having total income of up to ` 5 lakh.

# “Health and Education cess” on Income-tax:

4% of income-tax and surcharge, if applicable

Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1). However, agricultural income has to be aggregated with non-agricultural income for determining the rate at which non-agricultural income would be subject to tax, in case of individuals, HUF, AOPs & BOIs etc., where the –

- agricultural income exceeds ` 5,000 p.a. and
- non-agricultural income exceeds basic exemption limit.

# The following are the steps to be followed in computation of tax-

1. Tax on non-agricultural income plus agricultural income
2. Tax on agricultural income plus basic exemption limit
3. Tax payable by the assessee = Step 1 – Step 2
4. Add Surcharge/Deduct Rebate u/s 87A, if applicable.
5. Add Health and Education Cess@4%.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Who is an “Assessee”? Explain
2. State any four instances where the income of the previous year is assessable in the previous year itself instead of the assessment year.
3. Whether the income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery is taxable under the Income-tax Act, 1961? Examine.
4. What are the two schools of Hindu law and where are they prevalent? Explain. Also, mention the difference between the two schools of Hindu Law.
5. What is the difference between an Association of Persons and Body of Individuals?
6. Mr. Sumit, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 15 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him in India and ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia during the A.Y.2024-25. What would be his business income, assuming he has no other business?
7. Mr. Raja, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 10 lakhs from sale of coffee grown and cured in India during the A.Y.2024-25. His friend, Mr. Shyam, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded by him in India during the A.Y.2024-25. What would be the business income chargeable to tax in India of Mr. Raja and Mr. Shyam?
8. The Jain HUF in Assam comprises of Mr. Suresh Jain, his wife Mrs. Sapna Jain, his son Mr. Sarthak Jain, his daughter-in-law Mrs. Preeti Jain, his daughter Miss Seema Jain and his unmarried brother Mr. Pritam Jain. Which of the members of the HUF are eligible for coparcenary rights?
9. Compute the tax liability under default tax regime of Mr. Kashyap (aged 35), having total income of ` 51,75,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, income from house property and interest on fixed deposit.
10. Mr. Agarwal, aged 40 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 6,50,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable under section 112 of
# BASIC CONCEPTS

1.93 a

Mr. Sharma aged 62 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 2,30,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable under section 112 of ` 52,00,000, short term capital gain taxable under section 111A of ` 64,00,000 and other income of ` 1,14,00,000. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act assuming that the total income and its components are the same in both tax regimes.

# ANSWERS

1. As per section 2(7), assessee means a person by whom any tax or any other sum of money is payable under the Income-tax Act, 1961. In addition, the term includes –

- Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under the Act has been taken for the assessment of –
- - his income; or
- the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable; or
- the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or
- the amount of refund due to him or to such other person.

Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of the Act;
- Every person who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any provision of the Act.

2. The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the assessment year following the previous year. However, in a few cases, the income is taxed in the previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions
# 1.94 INCOME TAX LAW

have been made to protect the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as follows:

1. Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship is allowed to leave the port only when the tax has been paid or satisfactory arrangement has been made for payment thereof. 7.5% of the freight paid or payable to the owner or the charterer or to any person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on account of such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the same year in which it is earned.
2. Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India during the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and he has no present intention of returning to India, the total income of such individual for the period from the expiry of the respective previous year up to the probable date of his departure from India is chargeable to tax in that assessment year.
3. If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or purpose and the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is likely to be dissolved in the same year or in the next year, he can make assessment of the income up to the date of dissolution as income of the relevant assessment year.
4. During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing Officer that a person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his assets to avoid payment of any liability under this Act, the total income of such person for the period from the expiry of the previous year to the date, when the Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax in that assessment year.
5. Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment year, the income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up to the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in that assessment year.

As per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery shall be deemed to be agricultural income and
# BASIC CONCEPTS

1.95 a exempt from tax, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land.

# 4.

The two schools of Hindu law are Dayabaga school, prevalent in West Bengal and Assam, and Mitakshara school, prevalent in rest of India. Under the Dayabaga school of Hindu Law, nobody acquires the right, share in the property by birth as long as the head of family is living. Thus, the children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as long as his father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will acquire right/share in the property. Hence, the father and his brothers would be the coparceners of the HUF.

Under the Mitakshara school of Hindu Law, one acquires the right to the family property by his birth and not by succession irrespective of the fact that his elders are living. Thus, every child born in the family acquires a right/share in the family property.

# 5.

In order to constitute an Association of Persons (AOP), persons must join for a common purpose or action and their object must be to produce income; it is not enough that the persons receive the income jointly. Body of Individuals denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees who merely receive the income jointly and who may be assessable in like manner and to the same extent as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-executors or co-trustees are assessable as a BOI as their title and interest are indivisible.

The difference between an AOP and BOI is that in case of a BOI, only individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any person can be its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member of AOP but not of BOI. In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will for a common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common will may or may not be present.

# 6.

Since Mr. Sumit is a resident, his global income would be taxable in India. Income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia would be his business income since it is from rubber plants grown outside India. 35% income from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him.
# INCOME TAX LAW

In India would be taxable as business income and balance 65% would be exempt as agricultural income.

Business income = 35% of ` 15 lakhs + ` 20 lakhs = ` 25.25 lakhs

# 7.

In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and cured by the seller in India, 25% income on such sale is taxable as business income. In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India, 40% income on such sale is taxable as business income.

Business income of Mr. Raja = 25% of ` 10 lakhs = ` 2.5 lakhs

Business income of Mr. Shyam = 40% of ` 20 lakhs = ` 8 lakhs

# 8.

Dayabaga school of Hindu law is prevalent in Assam. In Dayabaga school of Hindu law, nobody acquires the right, share in the property by birth as long as the head of family is living.

Thus, the children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as long as his father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will acquire right/share in the property.

Hence, Mr. Suresh Jain and his brother, Mr. Pritam Jain would be the coparceners of the Jain HUF and are eligible for coparcenary rights.

# 9.

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Kashyap for the A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime

| |(A) Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000|
|---|---|
|` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5%|` 15,000|
|` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 @10%|` 30,000|
|` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15%|` 45,000|
|` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20%|` 60,000|
|` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30%|` 11,02,500|
|Total|` 12,52,500|
|Add: Surcharge @ 10%|` 1,25,250|
| |` 13,77,750|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

|(B) Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,50,000 plus ` 10,50,000)|` 12,00,000|
|---|---|
|(C) Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs|` 1,75,000|
|(D) Tax payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B + C)|` 13,75,000|
|(E) Tax payable: lower of (A) and (D)|` 13,75,000|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 55,000|
|Tax liability|` 14,30,000|
|(F) Marginal Relief (A – D)|` 2,750|

# Alternative method -

|(A) Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000| |
|---|---|
|` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5%|` 15,000|
|` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 @10%|` 30,000|
|` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15%|` 45,000|
|` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20%|` 60,000|
|` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30%|` 11,02,500|
|Total|` 12,52,500|
|Add: Surcharge@10%|` 1,25,250|
| |` 13,77,750|
|(B) Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,50,000 plus ` 10,50,000)|` 12,00,000|
|(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B)|` 1,77,750|
|(D) Marginal Relief (` 1,77,750 – ` 1,75,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 50,00,000)|` 2,750|
|(E) Tax payable (A)-(D)|` 13,75,000|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 55,000|
|Tax liability|` 14,30,000|

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2024-25

# under default tax regime

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ₹ 6,50,00,000| |
|Tax@20% of ₹ 55,00,000|11,00,000|
|Tax@15% of ₹ 65,00,000|9,75,000|
|Tax on other income of ₹ 5,30,00,000| |
|₹ 3,00,000 – ₹ 6,00,000 @5%|15,000|
|₹ 6,00,000 – ₹ 9,00,000 @10%|30,000|
|₹ 9,00,000 – ₹ 12,00,000 @15%|45,000|
|₹ 12,00,000 – ₹ 15,00,000 @20%|60,000|
|₹ 15,00,000 – ₹ 5,30,00,000 @30%|1,54,50,000|
| |1,76,75,000|
|Add: Surcharge @15% on ₹ 20,75,000|3,11,250|
|@25% on ₹ 1,56,00,000|39,00,000|
| |42,11,250|
| |2,18,86,250|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|8,75,450|
|Tax Liability|2,27,61,700|

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2024-25

# under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ₹ 6,50,00,000| |
|Tax@20% of ₹ 55,00,000|11,00,000|
|Tax@15% of ₹ 65,00,000|9,75,000|
|Tax on other income of ₹ 5,30,00,000| |
|₹ 2,50,000 – ₹ 5,00,000 @5%|12,500|
|₹ 5,00,000 – ₹ 10,00,000 @20%|1,00,000|
|₹ 10,00,000 – ₹ 5,30,00,000 @30%|1,56,00,000|
| |1,57,12,500|

# BASIC CONCEPTS

|Add: Surcharge @15% on ` 20,75,000|3,11,250| |
|---|---|---|
|@37% on ` 1,57,12,500|58,13,625|61,24,875|
| | |2,39,12,375|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%| |9,56,495|
|Tax Liability| |2,48,68,870|

# 11. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime

|Particulars| |`|
|---|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000| | |
|Tax@20% of ` 52,00,000| |10,40,000|
|Tax@15% of ` 64,00,000| |9,60,000|
|Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000| | |
|` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5%|15,000| |
|` 6,00,000 – ` 9,00,000 @10%|30,000| |
|` 9,00,000 – ` 12,00,000 @15%|45,000| |
|` 12,00,000 – ` 15,00,000 @20%|60,000| |
|` 15,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30%|29,70,000|31,20,000|
| | |51,20,000|
|Add: Surcharge @15%| |7,68,000|
| | |58,88,000|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%| |235,520|
|Tax Liability| |61,23,520|

# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2024-25 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000| |
|Tax@20% of ` 52,00,000|10,40,000|

# 1.100 INCOME TAX LAW

|Tax@15% of ` 64,00,000|9,60,000|
|---|---|
|Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000| |
|` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5%|10,000|
|` 5,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @20%|1,00,000|
|` 10,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30%|31,20,000|
| |32,30,000|
| |52,30,000|
|Add: Surcharge @15%|7,84,500|
| |60,14,500|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|2,40,580|
|Tax Liability|62,55,080|

# CHAPTER 2

# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to-

- appreciate the provisions for determining the residential status of different persons;
- apply the relevant provisions to determine the residential status of different persons;
- examine the scope of income of a person based on his residential status;
- apply the relevant provisions to determine the total income of a person based on his residential status.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.2 INCOME TAX LAW

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

# Residence and Scope of Total Income

| | |Residential Status| |Scope of Total Income| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |Individual/HUF| |Resident|Resident but not ordinarily resident|Non-resident|
|Firm/LLP/AOP/BOI/company|Resident|Deemed resident|Non-resident| | |
| | |etc.|Global income is taxable in India|Income which is received/deemed to be received|Income received/accrued or deemed to be received/accrued|
|Resident (Individual)|Resident and ordinarily resident|Resident but not ordinarily resident|Non-resident| | |
|Income which accrues or arises outside India|being derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India| | | | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 1. RESIDENTIAL STATUS [SECTION 6]

The incidence of tax on any assessee depends upon his residential status under the Act. For all purposes of income-tax, taxpayers (individuals and HUF) are classified into three broad categories on the basis of their residential status viz.

1. Resident and ordinarily resident
2. Resident but not ordinarily resident
3. Non-resident

Taxpayers (other than individuals and HUF) are classified into two broad categories on the basis of their residential status viz.

1. Resident
2. Non-resident

|Residential Status|Individual/HUF|Individual/HUF|Firm/AOP/Local Authority/Company etc.| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Deemed Resident|Resident but not ordinarily resident| | | |
|Non-resident|Resident| |Non-resident| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.4 INCOME TAX LAW

The residential status of an assessee must be ascertained with reference to each previous year. A person who is resident and ordinarily resident in one year may become non-resident or resident but not ordinarily resident in another year or vice versa.

# 1.1 Residential Status of Individuals

1. Residential status on the basis of number of days of stay in India -
Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any previous year, if he satisfies any one of the following conditions:

1. He has been in India during the previous year for a total period of 182 days or more, or
2. He has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in India for at least 60 days in the relevant previous year.

If the individual satisfies any one of the conditions mentioned above, he is a resident. If both the above conditions are not satisfied, the individual is a non-resident.

- The term “stay in India” includes stay in the territorial waters of India (i.e. 12 nautical miles into the sea from the Indian coastline). Even the stay in a ship or boat moored in the territorial waters of India would be sufficient to make the individual resident in India.
- It is not necessary that the period of stay must be continuous or active nor is it essential that the stay should be at the usual place of residence, business or employment of the individual.
- For the purpose of counting the number of days stayed in India, both the date of departure as well as the date of arrival are considered to be in India.
- The residence of an individual for income-tax purpose has nothing to do with citizenship, place of birth or domicile. An individual can, therefore, be resident in more countries for tax purposes than one even though he can have only one domicile.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# Exceptions:

The following categories of individuals will be treated as resident in India only if the period of their stay during the relevant previous year amounts to 182 days or more. In other words, even if such persons were in India for 60 days or more (but less than 182 days) in the relevant previous year, they will not be treated as resident due to the reason that their stay in India was for 365 days or more during the 4 immediately preceding years.

1. Indian citizen, who leaves India during the relevant previous year as a member of the crew of an Indian ship or for purposes of employment outside India, or
2. Indian citizen or person of Indian origin1 who, being outside India comes on a visit to India during the relevant previous year.

However, such person having total income, other than the income from foreign sources [i.e., income which accrues or arises outside India (except income from a business controlled in or profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India], exceeding ` 15 lakhs during the previous year will be treated as resident in India if -

- the period of his stay during the relevant previous year amounts to 182 days or more, or
- he has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in India for at least 120 days in the previous year.

Stay in India for 120 days in the relevant P.Y. is not a standalone condition. This condition requires stay in India for 120 days in the relevant P.Y. + 365 days in the 4 years immediately preceding the P.Y.

1 A person is said to be of Indian origin if he or either of his parents or either of his grandparents was born in undivided India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.6 INCOME TAX LAW

How to determine period of stay in India for an Indian citizen, being a crew member?

In case of foreign bound ships where the destination of the voyage is outside India, there is uncertainty regarding the manner and the basis of determining the period of stay in India for an Indian citizen, being a crew member.

To remove this uncertainty, Explanation 2 to section 6(1) provides that in the case of an individual, being a citizen of India and a member of the crew of a foreign bound ship leaving India, the period or periods of stay in India shall, in respect of such voyage, be determined in the prescribed manner and subject to the prescribed conditions.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No.70/2015 dated 17.8.2015, inserted Rule 126 in the Income-tax Rules, 1962 to compute the period of stay in such cases.

According to Rule 126, for the purposes of section 6(1), in case of an individual, being a citizen of India and a member of the crew of a ship, the period or periods of stay in India shall, in respect of an eligible voyage, not include the following period:

|Period to be excluded|Period commencing from|Period ending on|
|---|---|---|
|the date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in respect of joining the ship by the said individual for the eligible voyage|the date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in respect of signing off by that individual from the ship in respect of such voyage.| |

Meaning of certain term

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Eligible voyage|A voyage undertaken by a ship engaged in the carriage of passengers or freight in international traffic where – (i) for the voyage having originated from any port in India, has as its destination any port outside India; and (ii) for the voyage having originated from any port outside India, has as its destination any port in India.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.7

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. Anand is an Indian citizen and a member of the crew of a Singapore bound Indian ship engaged in carriage of passengers in international traffic departing from Chennai port on 6ᵗʰ June, 2023. From the following details for the P.Y. 2023-24, determine the residential status of Mr. Anand for A.Y. 2024-25, assuming that his stay in India in the last 4 previous years (preceding P.Y. 2023-24) is 400 days:

|Particulars|Date|
|---|---|
|Date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in respect of joining the ship by Mr. Anand|6ᵗʰ June, 2023|
|Date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in respect of signing off the ship by Mr. Anand|9ᵗʰ December, 2023|

# SOLUTION

In this case, since Mr. Anand is an Indian citizen and leaving India during P.Y. 2023-24 as a member of the crew of the Indian ship, he would be resident in India if he stayed in India for 182 days or more.

The voyage is undertaken by an Indian ship engaged in the carriage of passengers in international traffic, originating from a port in India (i.e., the Chennai port) and having its destination at a port outside India (i.e., the Singapore port). Hence, the voyage is an eligible voyage for the purposes of section 6(1).

Therefore, the period commencing from 6ᵗʰ June, 2023 and ending on 9ᵗʰ December, 2023, being the dates entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in respect of joining the ship and signing off from the ship by Mr. Anand, an Indian citizen who is a member of the crew of the ship, has to be excluded for computing the period of his stay in India. Accordingly, 187 days [25+31+31+30+31+30+9] have to be excluded from the period of his stay in India. Consequently, Mr. Anand’s period of stay in India during the P.Y. 2023-24 would be 179 days [i.e., 366 days – 187 days]. Since his period of stay in India during the P.Y. 2023-24 is less than 182 days, he is a non-resident for A.Y. 2024-25.

Deemed resident [Section 6(1A)] – An individual, being an Indian citizen, having total income, other than the income from foreign sources [ i.e.,
# 2.8 INCOME TAX LAW

Income which accrues or arises outside India (except income from a business controlled in or profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India, exceeding ` 15 lakhs during the previous year would be deemed to be resident in India in that previous year, if he is not liable to tax in any other country or territory by reason of his domicile or residence or any other criteria of similar nature.

However, this provision will not apply in case of an individual who is a resident of India in the previous year as per section 6(1).

Meaning of “liable to tax” – Liable to tax, in relation to a person and with reference to a country, means that there is an income-tax liability on such person under the law of that country for the time being in force. It also includes a person who has subsequently been exempted from such liability under the law of that country.

- Only Indian citizen can be deemed resident. An individual who is not an Indian citizen but a person of Indian Origin cannot be deemed resident u/s 6(1A).
- Stay in India is not necessary for being a deemed resident u/s 6(1A).

# Resident and ordinarily resident/Resident but not ordinarily resident

Only individuals and HUF can be “resident but not ordinarily resident” in India. All other classes of assessees can be either a resident or non-resident. A not-ordinarily resident person is one who satisfies any one of the conditions specified u/s 6(6).

1. If such individual has been non-resident in India in any 9 out of the 10 previous years preceding the relevant previous year, or
2. If such individual has, during the 7 previous years preceding the relevant previous year, been in India for a period of 729 days or less, or
3. If such individual is an Indian citizen or person of Indian origin (who, being outside India, comes on a visit to India in any previous year) having total income, other than the income from foreign sources [i.e., income which accrues or arises outside India (other than income derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India], exceeding ` 15 lakhs during the previous year, who has

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.9

been in India for 120 days or more but less than 182 days during that previous year, or

(iv) If such individual is an Indian citizen who is deemed to be resident in India under section 6(1A).

A deemed resident u/s 6(1A) is always RNOR.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Brett Lee, an Australian cricket player visits India for 100 days in every financial year. This has been his practice for the past 10 financial years.

1. Find out his residential status for the assessment year 2024-25.
2. Would your answer change if the above facts relate to Srinath, an Indian citizen who resides in Australia and represents the Australian cricket team?
3. What would be your answer if Srinath had visited India for 120 days instead of 100 days every year, including P.Y.2023-24?

# SOLUTION

(a) Determination of Residential Status of Mr. Brett Lee for the A.Y. 2024-25:

Period of stay during previous year 2023-24 = 100 days

Calculation of period of stay during 4 preceding PYs (100 x 4 = 400 days)

|Year|Period of Stay|
|---|---|
|2022-23|100 days|
|2021-22|100 days|
|2020-21|100 days|
|2019-20|100 days|
|Total|400 days|

Mr. Brett Lee has been in India for a period more than 60 days during previous year 2023-24 and for a period of more than 365 days during the 4 immediately preceding previous years. Therefore, since he satisfies one of the basic conditions under section 6(1), he is a resident for the A.Y. 2024-25.

Computation of period of stay during 7 preceding previous years = 100 x 7 = 700 days

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.10 INCOME TAX LAW

|2022-23|100 days|
|---|---|
|2021-22|100 days|
|2020-21|100 days|
|2019-20|100 days|
|2018-19|100 days|
|2017-18|100 days|
|2016-17|100 days|
|Total|700 days|

Since his period of stay in India during the past 7 previous years is less than 730 days, he is a not-ordinarily resident during the A.Y. 2024-25 (See Note below).

Therefore, Mr. Brett Lee is a resident but not ordinarily resident during the previous year 2023-24 relevant to the assessment year 2024-25.

Note: An individual, not being an Indian citizen, would be not-ordinarily resident person if he satisfies any one of the conditions specified under section 6(6), i.e,

1. If such individual has been non-resident in India in any 9 out of the 10 previous years preceding the relevant previous year, or
2. If such individual has during the 7 previous years preceding the relevant previous year been in India for a period of 729 days or less.

In this case, since Mr. Brett Lee satisfies condition (ii), he is a not-ordinarily resident for the A.Y. 2024-25.

(b) If the above facts relate to Mr. Srinath, an Indian citizen, who residing in Australia, comes on a visit to India, he would be treated as non-resident in India, irrespective of his total income (excluding income from foreign sources), since his stay in India in the current financial year is, in any case, less than 120 days.

(c) In this case, if Srinath’s total income (excluding income from foreign sources) exceeds ₹ 15 lakh, he would be treated as resident but not ordinarily resident in India for P.Y. 2023-24, since his stay in India is 120 days.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

2.11 in the P.Y.2023-24 and 480 days (i.e., 120 days x 4 years) in the immediately four preceding previous years.

If his total income (excluding income from foreign sources) does not exceed ` 15 lakh, he would be treated as non-resident in India for the P.Y. 2023-24, since his stay in India is less than 182 days in the P.Y.2023-24.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Mr. B, a Canadian citizen, comes to India for the first time during the P.Y. 2019-20. During the financial years 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, he was in India for 55 days, 60 days, 90 days, 150 days and 70 days, respectively. Determine his residential status for the A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

During the P.Y. 2023-24, Mr. B was in India for 70 days and during the 4 years preceding the P.Y. 2023-24, he was in India for 355 days (i.e. 55 + 60 + 90 + 150 days). Thus, he does not satisfy the basic condition under section 6(1). Therefore, he is a non-resident for the P.Y. 2023-24.

# 1.2 Residential status of HUF

Resident: A HUF would be resident in India if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.

Non-resident: If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly outside India, it would become a non-resident.

# Meaning of the term “control and management”

- The expression ‘control and management’ referred to under section 6 refers to the central control and management and not to the carrying on of day-to-day business by servants, employees or agents.
- Control and management means de facto control and management and not merely having the right to control or manage.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.12 INCOME TAX LAW

The business may be done from outside India and yet its control and management may be wholly within India. Therefore, control and management of a business is said to be situated at a place where the head and brain of the adventure is situated. Merely because the family has a house in India, where some of the members reside in the previous year, does not constitute that place as the seat of control and management of the affairs of the HUF unless important decisions concerning the affairs of the HUF are taken at that place.

The place of control may be different from the usual place of running the business and sometimes even the registered office of the assessee. This is because the control and management of a business need not necessarily be done from the place of business or from the registered office of the assessee.

But control and management do imply the functioning of the controlling and directing power at a particular place with some degree of permanence.

# Resident and ordinarily resident/ Resident but not ordinarily resident

If Karta of resident HUF satisfies both the following additional conditions (as applicable in case of individual) then, resident HUF will be resident and ordinarily resident, otherwise it will be resident but not ordinarily resident.

- Karta of resident HUF should be resident in at least 2 previous years out of 10 previous years immediately preceding relevant previous year.
- Stay of Karta during 7 previous years immediately preceding relevant previous year should be 730 days or more.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

The business of a HUF is transacted from Australia and all the policy decisions are taken there. Mr. E, the Karta of the HUF, who was born in Kolkata, visits India during the P.Y. 2023-24 after 15 years. He comes to India on 1.4.2023 and leaves for Australia on 1.12.2023. Determine the residential status of Mr. E and the HUF for A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

(a) During the P.Y. 2023-24, Mr. E has stayed in India for 245 days (i.e. 30+31+30+31+31+30+31+30+1 days). Therefore, he is a resident. However,
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

since he has come to India after 15 years, he does not satisfy the condition for being ordinarily resident. Therefore, the residential status of Mr. E for the P.Y. 2023-24 is resident but not ordinarily resident.

(b) Since the business of the HUF is transacted from Australia and policy decisions are taken there, it is assumed that the control and management is in Australia i.e., the control and management is wholly outside India. Therefore, the HUF is a non-resident for the P.Y. 2023-24.

Note – If the control and management is in India, even partially, then, the HUF would be resident in India. In such a case, the residential status of HUF would be resident but not ordinarily resident, since the Karta’s stay in India is for less than 730 days in the 7 previous years immediately preceding the relevant previous year.

# Residential Status of a HUF

|Is the control and management of its affairs situated wholly or partly in India?|YES|NO|
|---|---|---|
|Is Karta resident in India at least in any 2 PYs out of 10 PYs preceding the relevant PY?|(+)|HUF is Non-resident|
|Is his stay in India for 730 days or more during the 7 PYs preceding the relevant PY?|YES|HUF is ROR|
|NO|HUF is RNOR| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.14 INCOME TAX LAW

# 1.3 Residential status of firms, AoPs and BoIs

Resident: A firm, AoP and BoI would be resident in India if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.

Non-resident: Where the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly outside India, the firm, AoP and BoI would become a non-resident.

The residential status of the partners/members is immaterial while determining the residential status of a Firm/AOP/BOI.

# 1.4 Residential status of companies

A company would be resident in India in any previous year, if -

1. it is an Indian company; or
2. its place of effective management, in that year, is in India.

“Place of effective management” to mean a place where key management and commercial decisions that are necessary for the conduct of the business of an entity as a whole are, in substance made [Explanation to section 6(3)].

# Determination of residential status of a company

|Is the company an Indian company?|No|Whether POEM of the company is in India in the relevant P.Y.?|No|The company is a non-resident for the relevant P.Y.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Yes|Yes|The company is a resident in India for the relevant P.Y.|The company is a resident in India for the relevant P.Y.|The company is a resident in India for the relevant P.Y.|

Note – The guidelines issued by CBDT for determination of POEM of a foreign company and transition mechanism for a company which is incorporated outside India, which has not been assessed to tax in India earlier and has become resident in India for the first time due to application of POEM, has been provided in Chapter XII-BC. The same will be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 1.5 Residential status of local authorities and artificial juridical persons

Resident: Local authorities and artificial juridical persons would be resident in India if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.

Non-resident: Where the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly outside India, they would become non-residents.

# 2. SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

Section 5 provides the scope of total income in terms of the residential status of the assessee because the incidence of tax on any person depends upon his residential status in India. The scope of total income of an assessee depends upon the following three important considerations:

1. the residential status of the assessee;
2. the place of accrual or receipt of income, whether actual or deemed; and
3. the point of time at which the income had accrued to or was received by or on behalf of the assessee.

The ambit of total income of the three classes of assessees would be as follows:

# (1) Resident and ordinarily resident (ROR)

The total income of an ROR would, under section 5(1), consist of:

1. income received or deemed to be received in India during the previous year;
2. income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India during the previous year; and
3. income which accrues or arises outside India even if it is not received or brought into India during the previous year.

In simpler terms, an ROR has to pay tax on the total income accrued or deemed to accrue, received or deemed to be received in or outside India during the relevant previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.16 INCOME TAX LAW

# (2) Resident but not ordinarily resident (RNOR)

Under section 5(1), the total income of an RNOR would consist of –

1. income received or deemed to be received in India during the previous year;
2. income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India during the previous year; and
3. income derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India, even though it accrues or arises outside India.

Note – All other income accruing or arising outside India which is not received or deemed to be received or deemed to accrue or arise in India would not be included in his total income.

# (3) Non-resident

A non-resident’s total income under section 5(2) includes:

1. income received or deemed to be received in India in the previous year; and
2. income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India during the previous year.

Note: All assessees, whether resident or not, are chargeable to tax in respect of their income accrued, arisen, received or deemed to accrue, arise or to be received in India whereas a resident alone (resident and ordinarily resident in the case of individuals and HUF) is chargeable to tax in respect of income which accrues or arises outside India.

# Clarification regarding liability to income-tax in India of a non-resident seafarer receiving remuneration in NRE (Non-Resident External) account maintained with an Indian Bank

[Circular No.13/2017, dated 11.04.2017 and Circular No.17/2017, dated 26.04.2017]

Income by way of salary, received by non-resident seafarers, for services rendered outside India on a foreign going ship (with Indian flag or foreign flag) and received into the NRE bank account maintained with an Indian bank shall not be included in the total income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.17 Residential Status and Scope of Total Income: Whether the following incomes are to be included in Total Income?

|Scope of total Income|Resident and Ordinarily Resident (ROR)|Resident but not Ordinarily Resident (RNOR)|Non-Resident|
|---|---|---|---|
|Income received or deemed to be received in India during the previous year|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Income accruing or arising or deeming to accrue or arise in India during the previous year|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Income accruing or arising outside India during the previous year|Yes, even if such income is not received or brought into India during the previous year|Yes, but only if such income is derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India; Otherwise, No.|No|

# ILLUSTRATION 5

From the following particulars of income furnished by Mr. Anirudh pertaining to the year ended 31.3.2024, compute the total income for the A.Y. 2024-25, if he is:

1. Resident and ordinary resident;
2. Resident but not ordinarily resident;
3. Non-resident

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|(a) Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian Company, received in Germany|15,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.18 INCOME TAX LAW

(b) Dividend from a Japanese Company, received in Japan 10,000

(c) Rent from property in London deposited in a bank in London, later on remitted to India through approved banking channels 75,000

(d) Dividend from RP Ltd., an Indian Company 6,000

(e) Agricultural income from land in Gujarat 25,000

# SOLUTION

# Computation of total income of Mr. Anirudh for the A.Y. 20 24-25

|Particulars|Resident & ordinarily resident|Resident but not ordinarily resident|Non-Resident|
|---|---|---|---|
|1) Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian company, received in Germany|15,000|15,000|15,000|
|2) Dividend from a Japanese company, received in Japan|10,000|-|-|
|3) Rent from property in London deposited in a bank in London [See Note (i) below]|52,500|-|-|
|4) Dividend from RP Ltd., an Indian Company|6,000|6,000|6,000|
|5) Agricultural income from land in Gujarat [See Note (ii) below]|-|-|-|
|Total Income|83,500|21,000|21,000|

# Notes:

(i) It has been assumed that the rental income is the gross annual value of the property. Therefore, deduction @30% under section 24, has been provided and the net income so computed is taken into account for determining the total income of a resident and ordinarily resident.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.19

|Rent received (assumed as gross annual value)|75,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Deduction under section 24 (30% of ` 75,000)|22,500|
|Income from house property|52,500|

(ii) Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1).

# 2.1 Meaning of “Income received or deemed to be received”

All assessees are liable to tax in respect of the income received or deemed to be received by them in India during the previous year irrespective of -

1. their residential status, and
2. the place of its accrual.

Income is to be included in the total income of the assessee immediately on its actual or deemed receipt. The receipt of income refers to only the first occasion when the recipient gets the money under his control. Therefore, when once an amount is received as income, remittance or transmission of that amount from one place or person to another does not constitute receipt of income in the hands of the subsequent recipient or at the place of subsequent receipt.

# Income deemed to be received in India

# [Section 7]

Contribution in excess of 12% of salary to Recognised provident fund or interest credited in excess of 9.5% p.a (Annual accretion to the credit of RPF)
Contribution by the Central Government or any other employer in the P.Y. under a pension scheme referred u/s 80CCD
Amount transferred from unrecognised provident fund to recognised provident fund (being the employer's contribution and interest thereon)
# 2.2 Meaning of Income ‘accruing’ and ‘arising’

Accrue refers to the right to receive income, whereas due refers to the right to enforce payment of the same. In other words, when the right to receive income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.20 INCOME TAX LAW

becomes vested in the assessee, it is said to accrue or arise. For e.g. salary for work done in December will accrue throughout the month, day to day, but will become due on the salary bill being passed on 31st December or 1st January. Similarly, on Government securities, interest payable on specified dates arise during the period of holding, day to day, but will become due for payment on the specified dates.

Example: Interest on Government securities is usually payable on specified dates, say on 1st January and 1st July. In all such cases, the interest would be said to accrue from 1st July to 31st December and on 1st January, it will fall due for payment.

It must be noted that income which has been taxed on accrual basis cannot be assessed again on receipt basis, as it will amount to double taxation.

With a view to removing difficulties and clarifying doubts in the taxation of income, Explanation 1 to section 5 specifically provides that an item of income accruing or arising outside India shall not be deemed to be received in India merely because it is taken into account in a balance sheet prepared in India.

Further, Explanation 2 to section 5 makes it clear that once an item of income is included in the assessee’s total income and subjected to tax on the ground of its accrual/deemed accrual, it cannot again be included in the person’s total income and subjected to tax either in the same or in a subsequent year on the ground of its receipt - whether actual or deemed.

# 2.3 Income deemed to accrue or arise in India [Section 9]

Certain types of income are deemed to accrue or arise in India even though they may actually accrue or arise outside India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.21

Income arising outside India, payable by a foreign company or resident Indian to a non-resident or RNOR, where the consideration is any sum of money paid without aggregate of such sum > 50,000.

If the money borrowed and used for the purpose of business or profession carried on in India, technical services or royalty services are utilised for making income from any source outside India.

Person resident in India [Section 9(1)]:

|Income deemed to accrue or arise in India|Interest, if payable by|A non-resident|
|---|---|---|
|Dividend paid outside India|by an Indian Company|Government outside India|
|Salary earned for services rendered in India|Citizen for services|to Indian|

Any Business connection in India or source of property/asset situated in India, accruing or directly or indirectly arising from the transfer of capital asset outside India.
# 2.22 INCOME TAX LAW

The categories of income which are deemed to accrue or arise in India are:

1. Any income accruing or arising to an assessee in any place outside India whether directly or indirectly
- through or from any business connection in India,
- through or from any property in India,
- through or from any asset or source of income in India or
- through the transfer of a capital asset situated in India

would be deemed to accrue or arise in India. [Section 9(1)(i)]

In the case of a non-resident, the following shall not, however, be deemed to accrue or arise in India [Explanation 1 to section 9(1)(i)]:

In the case of a business, in respect of which all the operations are not carried out in India [Explanation 1(a) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a business of which all the operations are not carried out in India, the income of the business deemed to accrue or arise in India shall be only such part of income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India. Therefore, it follows that such part of income which cannot be reasonably attributed to the operations in India, is not deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Purchase of goods in India for export [Explanation 1(b) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, no income shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India to him through or from operations which are confined to the purchase of goods in India for the purpose of export.
Collection of news and views in India for transmission out of India [Explanation 1(c) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, being a person engaged in the business of running a news agency or of publishing newspapers, magazines or journals, no income shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India to him through or from activities which are confined to the collection of news and views in India for transmission out of India.
Shooting of cinematograph films in India [Explanation 1(d) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, no income shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India through or from operations which are confined to the shooting of any cinematograph film in India, if such non-resident is:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

(a) an individual, who is not a citizen of India or

(b) a firm which does not have any partner who is a citizen of India or who is resident in India; or

(c) a company which does not have any shareholder who is a citizen of India or who is resident in India.

(v) Activities confined to display of rough diamonds in SNZs [Explanation 1(e) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a foreign company engaged in the business of mining of diamonds, no income shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India to it through or from the activities which are confined to display of uncut and unassorted diamonds in any special zone notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf.

# Income from property, asset or source of income in India

Any income which arises from any property (movable, immovable, tangible and intangible property) would be deemed to accrue or arise in India.

# Examples:

1. Hire charges or rent paid outside India for the use of the machinery or buildings situated in India,
2. Deposits with an Indian company for which interest is received outside India etc.
3. Mr. X, resident in New York, USA, has a house property situated in India which has been given on rent by him. Rent receivable/ received by Mr. X would be taxable in India whether such rent is received by him in India or outside India as the house property is situated in India.

# Income through transfer of a capital asset situated in India

Capital gains arising through the transfer of a capital asset situated in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in all cases irrespective of the fact whether

1. the capital asset is movable or immovable, tangible or intangible;
2. the place of registration of the document of transfer etc., is in India or outside; and
3. the place of payment of the consideration for the transfer is within India or outside.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.24 INCOME TAX LAW

# (2) Income from salaries earned in India [Section 9(1)(ii)]

Income, which falls under the head “Salaries”, is deemed to accrue or arise in India, if it is earned in India. Salary payable for service rendered in India would be treated as earned in India.

Further, any income under the head “Salaries” payable for rest period or leave period which is preceded and succeeded by services rendered in India, and forms part of the service contract of employment, shall be regarded as income earned in India.

# (3) Income from salaries payable by the Government for services rendered outside India [Section 9(1)(iii)]

Income from ‘Salaries’ which is payable by the Government to a citizen of India for services rendered outside India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India. The following conditions have to be satisfied to treat such income as deemed to accrue or arise in India:

- Income should be chargeable under the head 'Salaries’;
- The payer should be Government of India;
- The recipient should be an Indian citizen, whether resident or non-resident in India;
- The services should be rendered outside India.

However, allowances and perquisites paid or allowed outside India by the Government to an Indian citizen for services rendered outside India is exempt, by virtue of section 10(7).

Exemption under section 10(7) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Mr. David, an Indian citizen aged 40 years, a Government employee serving in the Ministry of External Affairs, left India for the first time on 31.03.2023 due to his transfer to High Commission of Canada. He did not visit India any time during the P.Y. 2023-24. He has received the following income for the F.Y. 2023-24:
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.25

|S. No.|Particulars| |
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Salary (Computed)|5,00,000|
|(ii)|Foreign Allowance [not included in (i) above]|4,00,000|
|(iii)|Interest on fixed deposit from bank in India|1,00,000|
|(iv)|Income from agriculture in Nepal|2,00,000|
|(v)|Income from house property in Nepal|2,50,000|

Compute his Gross Total Income for A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

As per section 6(1), Mr. David is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2024-25, since he was not present in India at any time during the P.Y. 2023-24.

As per section 5(2), a non-resident is chargeable to tax in India only in respect of following incomes:

1. Income received or deemed to be received in India; and
2. Income accruing or arising or deemed to accrue or arise in India.

In view of the above provisions, income from agriculture in Nepal and income from house property in Nepal would not be chargeable to tax in the hands of David, assuming that the same were received in Nepal. Income from ‘Salaries’ payable by the Government to a citizen of India for services rendered outside India is deemed to accrue or arise in India as per section 9(1)(iii). Hence, such income is taxable in the hands of Mr. David, even though he is a non-resident.

However, allowances or perquisites paid or allowed as such outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for rendering service outside India is exempt under section 10(7). Hence, foreign allowance of 4,00,000 is exempt under section 10(7) in the hands of Mr. David.

# Gross Total Income of Mr. David for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|Salaries (computed)|5,00,000|
|Income from other sources (Interest on fixed deposit in India)|1,00,000|
|Gross Total Income|6,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.26 INCOME TAX LAW

# (4) Dividend paid by an Indian company outside India [Section 9(1)(iv)]

Dividends paid by an Indian company outside India is deemed to accrue or arise in India and would be taxable in the hands of shareholders.

# (5) Interest [Section 9(1)(v)]

Under section 9(1)(v), an interest is deemed to accrue or arise in India if it is payable by -

1. the Government;
2. a person who is resident in India;
3. Exception: Where it is payable in respect of any debt incurred or money borrowed and used for the purposes of a business or profession carried on by him outside India or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any source outside India, it will not be deemed to accrue or arise in India.

a person who is a non-resident, when it is payable in respect of any debt incurred or moneys borrowed and used for the purpose of a business or profession carried on in India by him.

Exception: Interest on moneys borrowed by the non-resident for any purpose in India other than a business or profession, will not be deemed to accrue or arise in India.

Example: If a non-resident ‘A’ borrows money from a non-resident ‘B’ and invests the same in shares of an Indian company, interest payable by ‘A’ to ‘B’ will not be deemed to accrue or arise in India.

# (6) Royalty [Section 9(1)(vi)]

Royalty will be deemed to accrue or arise in India when it is payable by -

1. the Government;
2. a person who is a resident in India

Exception: where it is payable in respect for the transfer of any right or the use of any property or information used or for the utilization of services for the purposes of a business or profession carried on by such person outside India.
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

India or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any source outside India; or

(iii) a person who is a non-resident, only when the royalty is payable in respect of any right, property or information used or services utilised for purposes of a business or profession carried on in India or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any source in India.

# Important points:

1. Lumpsum royalty not deemed to accrue arise in India: Lumpsum royalty payments made by a resident for the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software supplied by a non-resident manufacturer along with computer hardware under any scheme approved by the Government under the Policy on Computer Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 shall not be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
2. Meaning of Royalty: The term ‘royalty’ means consideration (including any lumpsum consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the recipient chargeable under the head ‘Capital gains’) for:
1. the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of licence) in respect of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar property;
2. the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the use of, a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar property;
3. the use of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or trade mark or similar property;
4. the imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial, commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill;
5. the use or right to use any industrial, commercial or scientific equipment²;

²but not including the amounts referred to in section 44BB containing presumptive tax provisions relating to non-resident engaged in the business of exploration, etc., of mineral oils, which will be dealt with at the final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.28 INCOME TAX LAW

(vi) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of licence) in respect of any copyright, literary, artistic or scientific work including films or video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes for use in connection with radio broadcasting.

Note: Consideration for sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic films is covered within the scope of royalty.

(vii) the rendering of any service in connection with the activities listed above.

The definition of ‘royalty’ for this purpose is wide enough to cover both industrial royalties as well as copyright royalties. The definition specially excludes income which should be chargeable to tax under the head ‘capital gains’.

(3) Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)

The consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty by clarifying that, transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or information includes and has always included transfer of all or any right for use or right to use a computer software (including granting of a licence) irrespective of the medium through which such right is transferred.

(4) Consideration in respect of any right, property or information – Is it royalty?

Royalty includes and has always included consideration in respect of any right, property or information, whether or not,

- (a) the possession or control of such right, property or information is with the payer;
- (b) such right, property or information is used directly by the payer;
- (c) the location of such right, property or information is in India.

(5) Meaning of Process: The term “process” includes and shall be deemed to have always included transmission by satellite (including up-linking, amplification, conversion for downlinking of any signal), cable, optic fibre or by any other similar technology, whether or not such process is secret.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# (7) Fees for technical services [Section 9(1)(vii)]

Any fees for technical services will be deemed to accrue or arise in India if they are payable by -

1. the Government,
2. a person who is resident in India
Exception: Where the fees are payable in respect of technical services utilised in a business or profession carried on by such person outside India or for the purpose of making or earning any income from any source outside India.
3. a person who is a non-resident, only where the fees are payable in respect of services utilised in a business or profession carried on by the non-resident in India or where such services are utilised for the purpose of making or earning any income from any source in India.

Fees for technical services means any consideration (including any lumpsum consideration) for the rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services (including providing the services of technical or other personnel). However, it does not include consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be income of the recipient chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’.

Income deemed to accrue or arise in India to a non-resident by way of interest, royalty and fees for technical services to be taxed irrespective of territorial nexus (Explanation to section 9)

Income by way of interest, royalty or fees for technical services which is deemed to accrue or arise in India by virtue of clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) of section 9(1), shall be included in the total income of the non-resident, whether or not –

1. the non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India; or
2. the non-resident has rendered services in India.

In effect, the income by way of fees for technical services, interest or royalty, from services utilized in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in case of a non-resident and be included in his total income, whether or not such services were rendered in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.30 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Miss Vivitha paid a sum of 5000 USD to Mr. Kulasekhara, a management consultant practising in Colombo, specializing in project financing. The payment was made in Colombo. Mr. Kulasekhara is a non-resident. The consultancy is related to a project in India with possible Ceylonese collaboration. Is this payment chargeable to tax in India in the hands of Mr. Kulasekhara, since the services were used in India?

# SOLUTION

A non-resident is chargeable to tax in respect of income received outside India only if such income accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to him in India.

The income deemed to accrue or arise in India under section 9 comprises, inter alia, income by way of fees for technical services, which includes any consideration for rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services. Therefore, payment to a management consultant relating to project financing is covered within the scope of “fees for technical services”.

The Explanation below section 9(2) clarifies that income by way of, inter alia, fees for technical services, from services utilized in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in case of a non-resident and be included in his total income, whether or not such services were rendered in India or whether or not the non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India.

In the instant case, since the services were utilized in India, the payment received by Mr. Kulasekhara, a non-resident, in Colombo is chargeable to tax in his hands in India, as it is deemed to accrue or arise in India.

(8) Any sum of money paid by a resident Indian to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or to a resident but not ordinarily resident in India [Section 9(1)(viii)]

Income arising outside India, being any sum of money paid without consideration, by an Indian resident person to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or to a RNOR would be deemed to accrue or arise in India if the same is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) i.e., if the aggregate of such sum received by a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or a RNOR exceeds ` 50,000.

You may refer to Unit 5 of Chapter 3 where chargeability of any sum of money received is discussed in detail.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

This deeming provision applies to only sum of money paid outside India to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or to a RNOR, and not in respect of property, movable or immovable, transferred outside India without consideration or for inadequate consideration to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or a RNOR.

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Compute the total income in the hands of an individual aged 35 years, being a resident and ordinarily resident, resident but not ordinarily resident, and non-resident for the A.Y. 2024-25, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)–

|Particulars|Amount (`)|
|---|---|
|Interest on UK Development Bonds, 50% of interest received in India|10,000|
|Income from a business in Chennai (50% is received in India)|20,000|
|Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian company, received in London|20,000|
|Dividend from British company received in London|5,000|
|Long term capital gains on sale of plant at Germany, 50% of gains are received in India|40,000|
|Income earned from business in Germany which is controlled in Delhi (` 40,000 is received in India)|70,000|
|Profits from a business in Delhi but managed entirely from London|15,000|
|Income from house property in London deposited in a Bank at London, brought to India (Computed)|50,000|
|Interest on debentures in an Indian company, received in London|12,000|
|Fees for technical services rendered in India but received in London|8,000|
|Profits from a business in Mumbai, managed from London|26,000|
|Income from property situated in Nepal received there (Computed)|16,000|
|Past foreign untaxed income brought to India during the previous year|5,000|
|Income from agricultural land in Nepal, received there and then brought to India|18,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.32 INCOME TAX LAW

Income from profession in Kenya which was set up in India, received 5,000 there but spent in India

Gift received on the occasion of his wedding 20,000

Interest on savings bank deposit in State Bank of India 12,000

Income from a business in Russia, controlled in Russia 20,000

Dividend from Reliance Petroleum Limited, an Indian Company 5,000

Agricultural income from a land in Rajasthan 15,000

# SOLUTION

# Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Resident and ordinarily resident|Resident but not ordinarily resident|Non-resident|
|---|---|---|---|
|Interest on UK Development Bonds, 50% of interest received in India|10,000|5,000|5,000|
|Income from a business in Chennai (50% is received in India)|20,000|20,000|20,000|
|Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian company, received in London|20,000|20,000|20,000|
|Dividend from British company received in London|5,000|-|-|
|Long term Capital gains on sale of plant at Germany, 50% of gains are received in India|40,000|20,000|20,000|
|Income earned from business in Germany which is controlled in Delhi, out of which ` 40,000 is received in India|70,000|70,000|40,000|
|Profits from a business in Delhi but managed entirely from London|15,000|15,000|15,000|
|Income from house property in London deposited in a Bank at London, later on remitted to India|50,000|-|-|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

|Particulars|Current Year|Previous Year 1|Previous Year 2|
|---|---|---|---|
|Interest on debentures in an Indian company, received in London|12,000|12,000|12,000|
|Fees for technical services rendered in India but received in London|8,000|8,000|8,000|
|Profits from a business in Mumbai, managed from London|26,000|26,000|26,000|
|Income from property situated in Nepal and received there|16,000|-|-|
|Past foreign untaxed income brought to India during the previous year|-|-|-|
|Income from agricultural land in Nepal, received there and then brought to India|18,000|-|-|
|Income from profession in Kenya which was set up in India, received there but spent in India|5,000|5,000|-|
|Gift received on the occasion of his wedding [not taxable]|-|-|-|
|Interest on savings bank deposit in State Bank of India|12,000|12,000|12,000|
|Income from a business in Russia, controlled in Russia|20,000|-|-|
|Dividend from Reliance Petroleum Limited, an Indian Company|5,000|5,000|5,000|
|Agricultural income from a land in Rajasthan [Exempt under section 10(1)]|-|-|-|
|Gross Total Income|3,52,000|2,18,000|1,83,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 80TTA [Interest on savings bank account subject to a maximum of ` 10,000]|10,000|10,000|10,000|
|Total Income|3,42,000|2,08,000|1,73,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 2.34

Income from foreign Indian citizen whose total income (excl. tax in any other country) > 15 lakh, who is not liable to tax in any other country.

Deemed resident – By default RNOR if the relevant P.Y. and having sources becomes modified immediately preceding PYs.

Income from foreign Indian citizen or PIO during the relevant P.Y. and having total income (excl. sources) > 15 lakh.

RNOR, in 4 to 120 days ≥ 365 days of due fulfillment.

Income from foreign Indian citizen or PIO during the relevant P.Y. and having total income (excl. sources) ≤ 15 lakh.

# Residential status of an individual

LET US RECAPITULATE

If both (i) and (ii) are satisfied, ROR. Otherwise RNOR.

All individuals should be satisfied for being a resident.

Main conditions in the relevant P.Y.:

|Section|(1)|(2)|(3)|(4)|(5)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Days|182|≥ 60|≥ 730|in the preceding PYs|in the preceding PYs|
|Additional conditions|(i)|(ii)| | | |

# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# 2.35

# Notes -

1. Section 6(1A) would not apply in case of an individual who is said to be resident in India in the previous year under section 6(1).
2. A person is said to be of Indian origin if he or either of his parents or either of his grandparents was born in undivided India.
3. “Income from foreign sources” means income which accrues or arises outside India (except income derived from a business controlled in or a profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India.

# (II) HUF [ROR/RNOR/non-resident]

A HUF would be resident in India if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India. If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly outside India, it would become a non-resident. If the HUF is resident, then the satisfaction or otherwise of additional conditions by Karta would determine whether the HUF is ROR or RNOR. If Karta satisfies both the additional conditions [(i) & (ii)] in (I) above, then, the HUF would be ROR. Otherwise, the HUF would be RNOR.

# (III) Firms, AoPs and BoIs [Resident/Non-resident]

1. A firm, AoP or BoI would be resident in India, if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.
2. If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly outside India, they would become a non-resident.

# (IV) Companies [Resident/Non-resident]

1. A company would be resident in India in any previous year, if it is an Indian company or its place of effective management (POEM) in that year, is in India.
2. If the company is not an Indian Company and its POEM is also not in India in that year, it would become a non-resident for that year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.36 INCOME TAX LAW

# Section 5 [Scope of Total Income]

|Resident and Ordinarily Resident|Resident but not Ordinarily Resident| | |Non-Resident|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Income received/ deemed to be received/ accrued or arisen/ deemed to accrue or arise in India;|Income which is received/ deemed to be received/ accrued or arisen/deemed to accrue or arise in or outside India|AND|Income received/accrued or arisen/deemed to accrue or arise in India.| |

In short, the global income is taxable. The income which accrues or arises outside India being derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Ram, an Indian citizen, left India on 22.09.2023 for the first time to work as an officer of a company in Germany. Determine the residential status of Ram for the A.Y. 2024-25.
2. Mr. Dey, residing in US since 1990, visits India for 30 days every year. He came back to India on 1.4.2022 for permanent settlement. What will be his residential status for A.Y. 2024-25?
3. Mr. Ramesh & Mr. Suresh are brothers and they earned the following incomes during the F.Y. 2023-24. Mr. Ramesh settled in Canada in the year 1996 and Mr. Suresh settled in Delhi. Compute the total income for the A.Y. 2024-25 assuming that both have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
|Sr. No.|Particulars|Mr. Ramesh (`)|Mr. Suresh (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Interest on Canada Development Bonds (only 50% of interest received in India)|35,000|40,000|
|2.|Dividend from British company, received in London|28,000|20,000|
|3.|Profits from a business in Nagpur, but managed directly from London|1,00,000|1,40,000|
|4.|Short term capital gain on sale of shares of an Indian company, received in India|60,000|90,000|
|5.|Income from a business in Chennai|80,000|70,000|
|6.|Fees for technical services rendered in India, but received in Canada|1,00,000|-|
|7.|Interest on savings bank deposit in UCO Bank, Delhi|7,000|12,000|
|8.|Agricultural income from a land situated in Andhra Pradesh|55,000|45,000|
|9.|Rent received in respect of house property at Bhopal|1,00,000|60,000|
|10.|Life insurance premium paid|-|30,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.38 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.

Examine the correctness or otherwise of the statement - “Income deemed to accrue or arise in India to a non-resident by way of interest, royalty and fees for technical services is to be taxed irrespective of territorial nexus”.

# 5.

Examine with reasons whether the following transactions attract income-tax in India in the hands of recipients:

- (i) Salary payable by Central Government to Mr. John, a citizen of India of ₹ 7,00,000 for the services rendered outside India considering that he pays tax as per the provisions of section 115BAC.
- (ii) Interest on moneys borrowed from outside India ₹ 5,00,000 by a non-resident for the purpose of business within India say, at Mumbai.
- (iii) Post office savings bank interest of ₹ 19,000 received by a resident assessee, Mr. Ram, aged 46 years if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
- (iv) Royalty paid by a resident to a non-resident in respect of a business carried on outside India.
- (v) Legal charges of ₹ 5,00,000 paid in Delhi to a lawyer of United Kingdom who visited India to represent a case at the Delhi High Court.

# ANSWERS

1. Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any previous year if he satisfies any one of the following conditions -

- (i) He has been in India during the previous year for a total period of 182 days or more, or
- (ii) He has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in India for at least 60 days in the previous year.

In the case of Indian citizens leaving India for employment, the period of stay during the previous year must be 182 days instead of 60 days given in (ii) above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

During the previous year 2023-24, Mr. Ram, an Indian citizen, was in India for 175 days only (i.e., 30+31+30+31+31+22 days). Thereafter, he left India for employment purposes.

Since he does not satisfy the minimum criteria of 182 days stay in India during the relevant previous year, he is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2024-25.

2. Mr. Dey is a resident in A.Y. 2024-25 since he has stayed in India for a period of 366 days (more than 182 days) during the P.Y. 2023-24.

As per section 6(6), a person will be “Not ordinarily Resident” in India in any previous year, if such person, inter alia,:

- (a) has been a non-resident in 9 out of 10 previous years preceding the relevant previous year; or
- (b) has during the 7 previous years immediately preceding the relevant previous year been in India for 729 days or less.

If he does not satisfy either of these conditions, he would be a resident and ordinarily resident.

For the previous year 2023-24 (A.Y. 2024-25), his status would be “Resident but not ordinarily resident” since he was non-resident in 9 out of 10 previous years immediately preceding the P.Y. 2023-24. He was resident only in the P.Y. 2022-23. Prior to that, he was non-resident in all the years since his stay in India was only for 30 days each year.

He can be resident but not ordinarily resident also due to the fact that he has stayed in India only for 545 days [365 days in P.Y. 2022-23 + (30 days x 6 years)] in 7 previous years immediately preceding the P.Y. 2023-24, which is less than 730 days.

# 3. Computation of total income of Mr. Ramesh & Mr. Suresh for the A.Y. 2024-25

|S. No.|Particulars|Mr. Ramesh (Non-Resident) (`)|Mr. Suresh (Resident) (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Interest on Canada Development Bond (See Note 2)|17,500|40,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 2.40 INCOME TAX LAW

|2. Dividend from British Company received in London (See Note 3)|-|20,000|
|---|---|---|
|3. Profits from a business in Nagpur but managed directly from London (See Note 2)|1,00,000|1,40,000|
|4. Short term capital gain on sale of shares of an Indian company received in India (See Note 2)|60,000|90,000|
|5. Income from a business in Chennai (See Note 2)|80,000|70,000|
|6. Fees for technical services rendered in India, but received in Canada (See Note 2)|1,00,000|-|
|7. Interest on savings bank deposit in UCO Bank, Delhi (See Note 2)|7,000|12,000|
|8. Agricultural income from a land situated in Andhra Pradesh (See Note 4)|-|-|
|9. Income from house property at Bhopal (See Note 5)|70,000|42,000|
|Gross Total income|4,34,500|4,14,000|
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A| | |
|Section 80C - Life insurance premium|-|30,000|
|Section 80TTA (See Note 6)|7,000|10,000|
|Total Income|4,27,500|3,74,000|

# Notes:

1. Mr. Ramesh is a non-resident since he has been living in Canada since 1996. Mr. Suresh, is settled in Delhi, and thus, assumed as a resident and ordinarily resident.

2. In case of a resident and ordinarily resident, his global income is taxable as per section 5(1). However, as per section 5(2), in case of a non-resident, only the following incomes are chargeable to tax:

(i) Income received or deemed to be received in India; and

(ii) Income accruing or arising or deemed to accrue or arise in India.
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

Therefore, fees for technical services rendered in India would be taxable in the hands of Mr. Ramesh, even though he is a non-resident. The income referred to in Sl. No. 3, 4, 5 and 7 are taxable in the hands of both Mr. Ramesh and Mr. Suresh since they accrue or arise / deemed to accrue or arise in India. Interest on Canada Development Bond would be fully taxable in the hands of Mr. Suresh, whereas only 50%, which is received in India, is taxable in the hands of Mr. Ramesh.

# 3.

Dividend received from British company in London by Mr. Ramesh, a non-resident, is not taxable since it is accrued and received outside India. However, such dividend received by Mr. Suresh is taxable, since he is a resident and ordinarily resident.

# 4.

Agricultural income from a land situated in India is exempt under section 10(1) in the case of both non-residents and residents.

# 5.

Income from house property -

| |Mr. Ramesh (`)|Mr. Suresh (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Rent received|1,00,000|60,000|
|Less: Deduction u/s 24(a) @30%|30,000|18,000|
|Net income from house property|70,000|42,000|

The net income from house property in India would be taxable in the hands of both Mr. Ramesh and Mr. Suresh, since the accrual and receipt of the same are in India.

# 6.

In case of an individual, interest upto ` 10,000 from savings account with, inter alia, a bank is allowable as deduction under section 80TTA.

# 4.

This statement is correct. As per Explanation to section 9, income by way of interest, royalty or fees for technical services which is deemed to accrue or arise in India by virtue of clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) of section 9(1), shall be included in the total income of the non-resident, whether or not -
# 2.42 INCOME TAX LAW

(i) non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India; or

(ii) the non-resident has rendered services in India.

In effect, the income by way of fees for technical services, interest or royalty from services utilised in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in case of a non-resident and be included in his total income, whether or not such services were rendered in India and irrespective of whether the non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India.

# 5. Taxability of receipts

|Taxable/Not Taxable|Amount liable to tax (`)|Reason|
|---|---|---|
|Taxable|6,50,000|As per section 9(1)(iii), salaries payable by the Government to a citizen of India for service rendered outside India shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India. Therefore, salary paid by Central Government to Mr. John for services rendered outside India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India since he is a citizen of India. He would be entitled to standard deduction of ` 50,000 under section 16(ia).|
|Taxable|5,00,000|As per section 9(1)(v)(c), interest payable by a non-resident on moneys borrowed and used for the purposes of business carried on by such person in India shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India in the hands of the recipient.|
|Partly Taxable|5,500|The interest on Post office savings bank a/c would be exempt u/s 10(15)(i) only to the extent of ` 3,500 in case of an individual a/c. Further, interest upto ` 10,000, would be allowed as|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME

2.43 deduction u/s 80TTA from Gross Total Income. Balance ` 5,500 i.e., ` 19,000 - ` 3,500 - ` 10,000 would be taxable in the hands of Mr. Ram, a resident.

(iv) Not Taxable - Royalty paid by a resident to a non-resident in respect of a business carried outside India would not be taxable in the hands of the non-resident provided the same is not received in India. This has been provided as an exception to deemed accrual mentioned in section 9(1)(vi)(b).

(v) Taxable 5,00,000 In case of a non-resident, any income which accrues or arises in India or which is deemed to accrue or arise in India or which is received in India or is deemed to be received in India is taxable in India. Therefore, legal charges paid in India to a non-resident lawyer of UK, who visited India to represent a case at the Delhi High Court would be taxable in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 1

# HEADS OF INCOME

# UNIT – 1 : SALARIES

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to -

- ascertain the point of time when salary income is chargeable to tax;
- comprehend the meaning of salary, profits in lieu of salary, allowances, perquisite and various retirement benefits;
- identify the allowances which are exempt and perquisites which are tax free under default tax regime under section 115BAC and under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act);
- determine the taxable portion of retirement benefits, allowances and other benefits which form part of salary;
- determine the value of perquisite chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”;
- identify the admissible deductions from salary under the default tax regime under section 115BAC;
- identify the admissible deductions from salary under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act);
- compute the income chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries” under both the default tax regime and the optional tax regime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.2 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” as per default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Particulars|Amt(`)|
|---|---|
|(i) Basic Salary|xxx|
|(ii) Fees/Commission|xxx|
|(iii) Bonus|xxx|
|(iv) Allowances:| |
|(a) Dearness Allowance [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(b) House Rent Allowance (HRA) [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(c) Children Education Allowance [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(d) Children Hostel Allowance [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(e) Transport allowance|xxx|
|Less: ` 3,200 per month only in case of blind/ deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee|Less: ` 3,200 per month only in case of blind/ deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee|
| |xxx|
|(f) Entertainment Allowance [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(g) Travelling Allowance/Daily Allowance/Conveyance Allowance|xxx|
|Less: Exempt if the amount is fully utilised for the purpose|Less: Exempt if the amount is fully utilised for the purpose|
| |xxx|
|(h) Other Allowances including overtime allowance, city compensatory allowance etc. [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(v) Taxable Perquisites| |
|(a) Value of rent-free accommodation provided to the employee*|xxx|
|(b) Value of any accommodation provided to the employee at a concessional rate*|xxx|
|I) Where the accommodation is provided by the Govt. to its employees| |
|License fee determined by the Govt.|xxx|
|Less: Rent actually paid by the employer|xxx|

*In case of furnished accommodation, the value will be increased by 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture or hire charges, as the case may be, less amount recovered from the employees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# II) Where the accommodation is provided by any other employer

If accommodation is owned by the employer

|(i)|Cities having population > 25 lakh as per 2001 census|15% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|Cities having population > 10 lakh ≤ 25 lakh as per 2001 census|10% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|
|(iii)|In other cities|7.5% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|

If accommodation is taken on lease/rent by the employer

Lower of lease rental paid or payable by the employer (or) 15% of salary

Less: Rent recovered from the employee

(c) Obligation of employee discharged by employer: For e.g., Professional tax paid by the employer

(d) Any sum payable by the employer to effect an assurance on the life of the employee or to effect a contract for annuity: Actual expenditure incurred by the employer

(e) Amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made

- in a recognised provident fund,
- in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)
- in an approved superannuation fund

by the employer to the account of the assessee, to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000 in a P.Y.

(f) Annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during the P.Y. to the balance at the credit of the recognized provident fund or NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it relates to the employer’s contribution which is included in total income in any P.Y. under section 17(2)(vii)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.4 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

- (g) Value of use of motor car [Refer Table below] xxx
- (h) Any other perquisite: For example, xxx
- (1) Provision of services of a sweeper, gardener, watchman or personal attendant: Actual cost to employer by way of salary paid or payable for such services (-) amount paid by the employee
- (2) Gas, electricity, or water supplied by employer for household consumption of the employee: Amount paid on that account by the employer to the agency supplying gas etc. (-) amount paid by the employee
- (3) Provision of free or concessional education facilities for any member of employee’s household: Sum equal to the expenditure incurred by the employer (-) amount paid or recovered from the employee
- Where educational institution is maintained and owned by employer: Cost of such education in similar institution in or near the locality (-) amount paid or recovered from employee [However, there would be no perquisite if the value of benefit per child does not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.]
- (4) Interest-free or concessional loan exceeding ` 20,000: Interest computed at the rate charged by SBI as on 1ˢᵗ day of relevant P.Y. in respect of loans for similar purposes on the maximum outstanding monthly balance (-) interest actually paid by employee
- (5) Free food and non-alcoholic beverages through paid vouchers
- (6) Value of gift, voucher: Sum equal to the amount of such gift [If value of gift, voucher is below ` 5,000, there would be no perquisite]
- (7) Use of moveable assets [Refer table at page 3.88]
- (8) Transfer of moveable assets: Actual cost of asset to employer – cost of normal wear and tear – Amount paid or recovered from employee [Refer table at page 3.89]

(vi) Leave travel concession [Fully taxable] xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.5

# (vii) Gratuity

|(a) Received during the tenure of employment (fully taxable)|xxx| |
|---|---|---|
|(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise|xxx| |
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10) [Refer fig at Page 3.32]|xxx|xxx|

# (viii) Uncommuted pension (fully taxable)

xxx
# (ix) Commuted pension

| |xxx| |
|---|---|---|
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A) [Refer fig at Page 3.29]|xxx|xxx|

# (x) Leave encashment

|(a) Received during the employment (fully taxable)|xxx| |
|---|---|---|
|(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise|xxx| |
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10AA) [Refer fig at Page 3.36]|xxx|xxx|

# (xi) Voluntary retirement compensation

| |xxx| |
|---|---|---|
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10C) - Least of the following:|xxx|xxx|
|(a) Compensation received/receivable on voluntary retirement|xxx| |
|(b) ` 5,00,000|xxx| |
|(c) 3 months’ salary x completed years of service|xxx| |
|(d) Last drawn salary x remaining months of service left|xxx| |

# (xii) Retrenchment compensation etc.

|xxx| | |
|---|---|---|
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10B) – Least of the following:|xxx|xxx|
|(a) Compensation actually received|xxx| |
|(b) ` 5,00,000|xxx| |
|(c) 15 days average pay x completed years of service and part thereof in excess of 6 months|xxx| |

# Gross Salary

xxx
# Less: Deduction under section 16

Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) - amount of salary or ` 50,000, whichever is less
xxx
# Income under the head “Salaries”

xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.6 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)

|Particulars|Amt(`)|
|---|---|
|(i) Basic Salary|xxx|
|(ii) Fees/Commission|xxx|
|(iii) Bonus|xxx|
|(iv) Allowances:| |
|(a) Dearness Allowance [Fully taxable]|xxx|
|(b) House Rent Allowance (HRA)|xxx|
|Less: Least of the following is exempt [Section 10(13A)]|xxx|
|(i) HRA actually received|xxx|
|(ii) Rent paid (-)10% of salary for the relevant period|xxx|
|(iii) 50% of salary, if accommodation is located in Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi or Chennai or 40% of salary in any other city for the relevant period|xxx|
|(c) Children Education Allowance|xxx|
|Less: Exempt upto ` 100 per month per child upto maximum of two children|xxx|
|(d) Children Hostel Allowance|xxx|
|Less: Exempt upto ` 300 per month per child upto maximum of two children|xxx|
|(e) Transport allowance|xxx|
|Less: ` 3,200 per month only in case of blind/ deaf and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employee|xxx|
|(f) Entertainment Allowance|xxx|
|(g) Travelling Allowance/ Daily Allowance/ Conveyance Allowance|xxx|
|Less: Exempt if the amount is fully utilised for the purpose|xxx|
|(h) Other Allowances including overtime allowance, city compensatory allowance etc.|xxx|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.7 Taxable Perquisites

# (a) Value of rent free accommodation† provided to the employee

# (b) Value of any accommodation provided to the employee at a concessional rate

# I) Where the accommodation is provided by the Govt. to its employees

|License fee determined by the Govt.|xxx|
|---|---|
|Less: Rent actually paid by the employer|xxx|

# II) Where the accommodation is provided by any other employer

# If accommodation is owned by the employer

|(i) Cities having population > 25 lakh as per 2001 census|15% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|xxx|
|---|---|---|
|(ii) Cities having population >10 lakh < 25 lakh as per 2001 census|10% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|xxx|
|(iii) In other cities|7.5% of salary in respect of the period of occupation (–) rent recovered from employee|xxx|

# If accommodation is taken on lease/rent by the employer

Lower of lease rental paid or payable by the employer (or) 15% of salary
Less: Rent recovered from the employee
xxx
# (c) Obligation of employee discharged by employer: For e.g., Professional tax paid by the employer

# (d) Any sum payable by the employer to effect an assurance on the life of the employee or to effect a contract for annuity: Actual expenditure incurred by the employer

# (e) Amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made –

†In case of furnished accommodation, the value will be increased by 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture or hire charges, as the case may be, less amount recovered from the employees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.8 INCOME TAX LAW

- in a recognised provident fund,

- in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)

- in an approved superannuation fund by the employer to the account of the assessee, to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000

(f) Annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during the P.Y. to the balance at the credit of the recognized provident fund or NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it relates to the employer’s contribution which is included in total income in any P.Y. under section 17(2)(vii)

(g) Value of use of motor car [Refer Table below]

(h) Any other perquisite: For example,

1. Provision of services of a sweeper, gardener, watchman or personal attendant: Actual cost to employer by way of salary paid or payable for such services (-) amount paid by the employee
2. Gas, electricity, or water supplied by employer for household consumption of the employee: Amount paid on that account by the employer to the agency supplying gas etc. (-) amount paid by the employee
3. Provision of free or concessional education facilities for any member of employee’s household: Sum equal to the expenditure incurred by the employer (-) amount paid or recovered from the employee

Where educational institution is maintained and owned by employer: Cost of such education in similar institution in or near the locality (-) amount paid or recovered from employee [However, there would be no perquisite if the value of benefit per child does not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.]

Note: Above perquisites in (g) and (h) are taxable only in case of specified employees.

(4) Interest-free or concessional loan exceeding ` 20,000: Interest computed at the rate charged by SBI as on 1ˢᵗ day of relevant P.Y. in respect of loans for similar purposes on the maximum outstanding monthly balance (-) interest actually paid by employee

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(5) Free food and non-alcoholic beverages: Expenses incurred by employer (-) amount recovered from employee [Free food and non-alcoholic beverages provided during office hours or paid vouchers upto ` 50 per meal is exempt]

(6) Value of gift, voucher: Sum equal to the amount of such gift [If value of gift, voucher is below ` 5,000, there would be no perquisite]

(7) Use of moveable assets [Refer table at page 3.88]

(8) Transfer of moveable assets: Actual cost of asset to employer – cost of normal wear and tear – Amount paid or recovered from employee [Refer table at page 3.89]

(vi) Leave travel concession xxx

Less: Exempt u/s 10(5) [Refer table at Page 3.63] xxx xxx

(vii) Gratuity

(a) Received during the tenure of employment (fully taxable) xxx

(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10) [Refer fig at Page 3.32] xxx xxx

(viii) Uncommuted pension (fully taxable) xxx

(ix) Commuted pension xxx

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A) [Refer fig at Page 3.29] xxx xxx

(x) Leave encashment

(a) Received during the employment (fully taxable) xxx

(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10AA) [Refer fig at Page 3.36] xxx xxx

(xi) Voluntary retirement compensation xxx

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10C) - Least of the following: xxx xxx

(a) Compensation received/receivable on voluntary retirement xxx

(b) ` 5,00,000 xxx

(c) 3 months’ salary x completed years of service xxx

(d) Last drawn salary x remaining months of service left xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.10 INCOME TAX LAW

# (xii) Retrenchment compensation etc.

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10B) – Least of the following:

- (a) Compensation actually received
- (b) ` 5,00,000
- (c) 15 days average pay x completed years of service and part thereof in excess of 6 months

Gross Salary

Less: Deduction under section 16

- Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) - amount of salary or ` 50,000, whichever is less
- Entertainment allowance u/s 16(ii) (only for Govt. employees)
- Least of the following is allowable as deduction:
- - (a) ` 5,000
- (b) 1/5ᵗʰ of basic salary
- (c) Actual entertainment allowance received

Professional Tax/Tax on employment (paid by employer/ employee) u/s 16(iii)

Income under the head “Salaries”

# Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” under optional tax regime taking Salaries computed as per default tax regime under section 115BAC as the starting point

|Particulars|Amt(`)|
|---|---|
|Income under the head “Salaries” under default tax regime under section 115BAC|xxx|
|Less: HRA exempt under section 10(13A) – Least of the three limits|xxx|
|Children Education Allowance (Upto ` 100 per month per child upto maximum of two children)|xxx|
|Children Hostel Allowance (Upto ` 300 per month per child upto maximum of two children)|xxx|
|Free food and non-alcoholic beverages through paid vouchers upto ` 50 per meal|xxx|
|Leave travel concession exempt u/s 10(5)|xxx|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.11

Less: Deduction under section 16

- Entertainment allowance u/s 16(ii) (only for Govt. employees) xxx
- Professional Tax/Tax on employment (paid by employer/employee) u/s 16(iii) xxx

Income under the head “Salaries” under optional tax regime xxx

# PERQUISITE VALUE OF MOTOR CAR

|S. No.|Car owned/hired by|Expenses met by|Wholly official use|Partly personal use|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|Employer|Employer|No|cc of engine|
| | | |Perquisite value*|upto 1.6 litres ` 1,800 p.m.|
| | | | |above 1.6 litres ` 2,400 p.m.|
| | | | |If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900 p.m. should be added to the above value.|
|2|Employee|Employer|No|Actual amount of expenditure incurred by the employer as reduced by the perquisite value arrived at in (1) above.|
|3|Employer|Employee|-|cc of engine|
| | | |Perquisite value|upto 1.6 litres ` 600 p.m.|
| | | | |above 1.6 litres ` 900 p.m.|
| | | | |If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900 p.m. should be added to the above value.|

*provided employer maintains the complete details of such journey and expenditure thereon and gives a certificate that such expenditure are incurred wholly for official use.

Perquisite value of motor car is taxable only in case of specified employees if motor car is provided by the employer to the employee. However, where the motor car is owned by the employee and used by him or members of his family wholly for personal purpose and for which employer reimburses the running and maintenance expenses of the car, the perquisite value of motor car would be taxable in case of all employees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.12 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Where car is owned by employer and expenses are also met by the employer, the taxable perquisite in case such car is used wholly for personal purposes of the employee would be equal to the actual expenditure incurred by the employer on running and maintenance expenses and normal wear and tear (calculated @10% p.a. of actual cost of motor car) less amount charged from the employee for such use.

# 1.1 INTRODUCTION

The provisions pertaining to Income under the head “Salaries” are contained in section 15, 16 and 17 in the following manner.

|Deduction|(Section 16)|
|---|---|
|- Standard deduction| |
|- Entertainment allowance$| |
|- Professional tax$| |
|Chargeability|(Section 15)|
|- Salary due| |
|- Salary paid or allowed, though not due| |
|- Arrears of salary| |
|Meaning|(Section 17)|
|- Salary| |
|- Perquisite| |
|- Profits in lieu of salary| |

$ Deduction for Entertainment allowance for Government employees and Professional tax are allowable only under the optional tax regime i.e., if the employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The same are not allowable under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

Before learning the provisions, it is essential to understand the important concepts relating to Salaries.

1. Employer-employee relationship: Every payment made by an employer to his employee for service rendered would be chargeable to tax as salaries. Before an income can become chargeable under the head ‘salaries’, it is vital that there should exist between the payer and the payee, the relationship of an employer and an employee.

Example: Sujata, an actress, is employed in Chopra Films, where she is paid a monthly remuneration of ` 2 lakh. She acts in various films produced by various.
# SALARIES

producers. The remuneration for acting in such films is directly paid to Chopra Films by the different producers.

In this case, 2 lakh will constitute salary in the hands of Sujata, since the relationship of employer and employee exists between Chopra Films and Sujata.

# Example:

In the above example, if Sujata acts in various films and gets fees from different producers, the same income will be chargeable as income from profession since the relationship of employer and employee does not exist between Sujata and the film producers.

# Example:

Commission received by a Director from a company is salary if the Director is an employee of the company. If, however, the Director is not an employee of the company, the said commission cannot be charged as salary but has to be charged either as income from business or as income from other sources depending upon the facts.

# Example:

Salary paid to a partner by a firm is nothing but an appropriation of profits. Any salary, bonus, commission or remuneration by whatever name called due to or received by partner of a firm shall not be regarded as salary. The same is to be charged as income from profits and gains of business or profession. This is primarily because the relationship between the firm and its partners is not that of an employer and employee.

# Example:

Remuneration received by a Member of Parliament/State Legislature is not taxable under the head ‘Salaries’ as such person is not a government employee. Such income would be taxable as ‘Income from Other Sources’.

# (2) Full-time or part-time employment:

Once the relationship of employer and employee exists, the income is to be charged under the head “salaries”. It does not matter whether the employee is a full-time employee or a part-time one.

If, for example, an employee works with more than one employer, salaries received from all the employers should be clubbed and brought to charge for the relevant previous years.

# (3) Forgoing of salary:

Once salary accrues, the subsequent waiver by the employee does not absolve him from liability to income-tax. Such waiver is only an application and hence, chargeable to tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.14 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Example: Mr. A, an employee instructs his employer that he is not interested in receiving the salary for April 2023 and the same might be donated to a charitable institution. In this case, Mr. A cannot claim that he cannot be charged in respect of the salary for April 2023. It is only due to his instruction that the donation was made to a charitable institution by his employer. It is only an application of income. Hence, the salary for the month of April 2023 will be taxable in the hands of Mr. A. He is, however, entitled to claim a deduction under section 80G for the amount donated to the institution. Deduction under section 80G is available only if Mr. A exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). [The concept of deductions is explained in detail in Chapter 6].

(4) Surrender of salary: However, if an employee surrenders his salary, in the public interest, to the Central Government under section 2 of the Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1961, the salary so surrendered would be exempt while computing his taxable income.

(5) Salary paid tax-free: This, in other words, means that the employer bears the burden of the tax on the salary of the employee. In such a case, the income from salaries in the hands of the employee will consist of his salary income and also the tax on this salary paid by the employer. However, as per section 10(10CC), the income-tax paid by the employer on non-monetary perquisites on behalf of the employee would be exempt in the hands of the employee.

(6) Place of accrual of salary: Under section 9(1)(ii), salary earned in India is deemed to accrue or arise in India even if it is paid outside India or it is paid or payable after the contract of employment in India comes to an end. If an employee is paid pension abroad in respect of services rendered in India, the same will be deemed to accrue in India. Similarly, leave salary paid abroad in respect of leave earned in India is deemed to accrue or arise in India. Section 9(1)(iii) provides that salaries payable by the Government to a citizen of India for services outside India shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India. However, by virtue of section 10(7), any allowance or perquisites paid or
# SALARIES

allowed outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for rendering services outside India will be fully exempt. Individual assessees who are not citizens of India are entitled to the following exemptions in respect of remuneration/ salary received by them under section 10(6):

# (i) Remuneration received by officials of Embassies etc. of Foreign States [Section 10(6)(ii)]

The remuneration received by a person for services as an official of an embassy, high commission, legation, commission, consulate or the trade representation of a foreign State or as a member of the staff of any of these officials is exempt.

# Conditions:

- (a) The remuneration received by our corresponding Government officials or members of the staff resident in such foreign countries for similar purposes should be exempt.
- (b) The above-mentioned members of the staff should be the subjects of the respective countries represented and should not be engaged in any other business or profession or employment in India.

# (ii) Remuneration received for services rendered in India as an employee of foreign enterprise [Section 10(6)(vi)]

Remuneration received by a foreign national as an employee of a foreign enterprise for service rendered by him during his stay in India is also exempt from tax.

# Conditions:

- (a) The foreign enterprise is not engaged in any business or trade in India;
- (b) The employee’s stay in India does not exceed 90 days during the previous year;
- (c) The remuneration is not liable to be deducted from the employer’s income chargeable to tax under the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.16 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Salary received by a non-citizen non-resident for services rendered in connection with employment on foreign ship [Section 10(6)(viii]

Salary income received by or due to a non-citizen of India who is also non-resident for services rendered in connection with his employment on a foreign ship is exempt where his total stay in India does not exceed 90 days during the previous year.

(iv) Remuneration received by Foreign Government employees during their stay in India for specified training [Section 10(6)(xi)]

Any remuneration received by employees of foreign Government from their respective Government during their stay in India, is exempt from tax, if such remuneration is received in connection with their training in any establishment or office of or in any undertaking owned by –

- (a) the Government; or
- (b) any company wholly owned by the Central or any State Government(s) or jointly by the Central and one or more State Governments; or
- (c) any company which is subsidiary of a company referred to in (b) above; or
- (d) any statutory corporation; or
- (e) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other similar law, which is wholly financed by the Central Government or any State Government(s) or jointly by the Central and one or more State Governments.

Now, let us discuss the chargeability under section 15, the provisions explaining the meaning of Salary, Perquisite and Profits in lieu of salary contained in section 17 and the deductions under section 16.

Exemption under section 10(6) and 10(7) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 1.2 BASIS OF CHARGE [SECTION 15]

(i) Section 15 deals with the basis of charge under the head “Salaries”. Salary is chargeable to tax either on ‘due’ basis or on ‘receipt’ basis, whichever is earlier.

(ii) However, where any salary, paid in advance, is assessed in the year of payment, it cannot be subsequently brought to tax in the year in which it becomes due.

(iii) If the salary paid in arrears has already been assessed on due basis, the same cannot be taxed again when it is paid.

Example: If A draws his salary in advance for the month of April 2024 in the month of March 2024 itself, the same becomes chargeable on receipt basis and is to be assessed as income of the P.Y.2023-24 i.e., A.Y.2024-25. However, the salary for the A.Y.2025-26 will not include that of April 2024.

Example: If the salary due for March 2024 is received by A later in the month of April 2024, it is still chargeable as income of the P.Y.2023-24 i.e., A.Y.2024-25 on due basis. Obviously, salary for the A.Y.2025-26 will not include that of March 2024.

# 1.2.1 Advance Salary

Advance salary is taxable when it is received by the employee irrespective of the fact whether it is due or not. The rule behind this is the basis of taxability of salary i.e., salary is taxed on due or receipt basis, whichever is earlier.

It may so happen that when advance salary is included and charged in a particular previous year, the rate of tax at which the employee is assessed may be higher than the normal rate of tax to which he would have been assessed. Section 89 provides for relief in these types of cases. The concept of relief under section 89 is explained in this unit later on.

Difference between advance salary and advance against salary

Loan is different from salary. When an employee takes a loan from his employer, which is repayable in certain specified installments, the loan amount cannot be brought to tax as salary of the employee.

Similarly, advance against salary is different from advance salary. It is an advance taken by the employee from his employer. This advance is generally adjusted with his salary over a specified time period. It cannot be taxed as salary.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.18 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1.2.2 Arrears of salary

Normally speaking, salary arrears must be charged on due basis. However, there are circumstances when it may not be possible to bring the same to charge on due basis.

Example: If the Pay Commission is appointed by the Central Government and it recommends revision of salaries of employees with retrospective date, the arrears received in that connection will be charged on receipt basis. Here also, relief under section 89 is available.

Example: If the Central Government announces increase in HRA in the previous year 2023-24 which is effective from 1.1.2022, then the arrears from 1.1.2022 to 31.3.3023 will be taxed in the previous year in which they are paid because they were never due earlier. Here also, relief under section 89 is available.

# 1.3 SALARY, PERQUISITE AND PROFITS IN LIEU OF SALARY [SECTION 17]

# Section 17

Salary [Section 17(1)]
Perquisite [Section 17(2)]
Profits in lieu of salary [Section 17(3)]

# 1.3.1 Meaning of Salary

The meaning of the term ‘salary’ for purposes of income-tax is much wider than what is normally understood. The term ‘salary’ for the purposes of Income-tax Act, 1961 will include both monetary payments (e.g. basic salary, bonus, commission, allowances etc.) as well as non-monetary facilities (e.g. housing accommodation, medical facility, interest free loans etc.).

Section 17(1) defines the term “Salary”. It is an inclusive definition and includes monetary as well as non-monetary items.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

‘Salary’ under section 17(1), includes the following:

1. wages,
2. any annuity or pension,
3. any gratuity,
4. any fees, commission, perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to any salary or wages,
5. any advance of salary,
6. any payment received in respect of any period of leave not availed by him i.e., leave salary or leave encashment,
7. Provident Fund:
- the portion of the annual accretion in any previous year to the balance at the credit of an employee participating in a recognised provident fund to the extent it is taxable and
- transferred balance in recognized provident fund to the extent it is taxable,
8. the contribution made by the Central Government or any other employer in the previous year to the account of an employee under a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD.
9. the contribution made by the Central Government in the previous year, to the Agniveer Corpus Fund account of an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 80CCH.

# (1) Wages

In common parlance, the term “wages” means fixed regular payment earned for work or services. The words “wages”, “salary”, “basic salary” are used interchangeably. Moreover, the payments in the form of Bonus, Allowances etc. made to the employee are also included within the meaning of salary.

Under the Income-tax Act, there are certain payments made which are fully taxable, partly taxable and fully exempt. For Example, wages, salary, bonus, dearness allowance etc. are fully taxable payments. Whereas monetary benefits in the form of allowances such as House Rent Allowance, conveyance allowance etc. are partially taxable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.20 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Allowances

Allowances are monetary payments made by the employer to the employees for meeting specific expenditure, whether personal or for the performance of duties. Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, allowance is taxable on due or receipt basis, whichever is earlier. These allowances are generally taxable unless some specific exemption has been provided in respect of such allowance. Various types of allowances normally in vogue are discussed below:

# Allowances

|Fully Taxable under|Fully Taxable under|Fully Exempt only|
|---|---|---|
|both regimes|default tax regime/|under the optional tax regime|
|(i) Entertainment Allowance|(i) House Rent [u/s 10(13A)]|(i) Allowances to High Court Judges|
|(ii) Dearness Allowance|(ii) Special Allowances [u/s 10(14)]|(ii) Salary Allowances paid by the United Nations Organization|
|(iii) Overtime Allowance|Except|(iii) Sumptuary allowance granted to High Court or Supreme Court Judges|
|(iv) Fixed Medical Allowance|(a) Travelling allowance| |
|(v) City Compensatory Allowance (to meet increased cost of living in cities)|(b) Daily allowance| |
|(vi) Interim Allowance|(c) Conveyance allowance| |
|(vii) Servant Allowance|(d) Transport allowance to blind/ deaf and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employee| |
|(viii) Project Allowance| | |
|(ix) Tiffin/Lunch/Dinner Allowance| | |
|(x) Any other cash allowance| | |
|(xi) Warden Allowance| | |
|(xii) Non-practicing Allowance| | |
|(xiii) Transport allowance to employee other| | |

Note – In cases (i) and (iii) above, the respective Acts provide for such exemption, notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. In case (ii), exemption is provided under the respective Act, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.21

than blind/ deaf and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employee

Fully Exempt under both tax regimes

Allowance granted to Government employees outside India [Section 10(7)]

# (A) Allowances which are fully taxable under both regime

1. City compensatory allowance: City Compensatory Allowance is normally intended to compensate the employees for the higher cost of living in cities. It is taxable irrespective of the fact whether it is given as compensation for performing his duties in a particular place or under special circumstances.
2. Entertainment allowance: This allowance is given to employees to meet the expenses towards hospitality in receiving customers etc. The Act gives a deduction towards entertainment allowance only to a Government employee in case he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The details of deduction permissible are discussed later on in this Unit.
3. Transport allowance: Transport allowance granted to an employee to meet his expenditure for the purpose of commuting between the place of his residence and the place of his duty is fully taxable. However, in case of blind/ deaf and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employees exemption upto ₹ 3,200 p.m. is provided under section 10(14)(ii) read with Rule 2BB. This exemption would be available under both regimes.

# (B) Allowances which are partially exempt under the optional tax regime/Allowances which are fully taxable under default tax regime

1. House rent allowance [Section 10(13A)]: HRA is a special allowance specifically granted to an employee by his employer towards payment of rent for residence of the employee. HRA granted to an employee is exempt to the extent of least of the following, in case such assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):
# 3.22 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Metro Cities (i.e., Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai)|Other Cities|
|---|---|
|1) HRA actually received for the relevant period|1) HRA actually received for the relevant period|
|2) Rent paid (-) 10% of salary for the relevant period|2) Rent paid (-) 10% of salary for the relevant period|
|3) 50% of salary for the relevant period|3) 40% of salary for the relevant period|

- Exemption u/s 10(13A) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A). It is not available under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.
- Exemption is not available to an assessee who lives in his own house, or in a house for which he has not incurred the expenditure of rent.
- “Salary” for this purpose means basic salary, dearness allowance, if provided in terms of employment and commission as a fixed percentage of turnover.
- Relevant period means the period during which the said accommodation was occupied by the assessee during the previous year.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. Raj Kumar has the following receipts from his employer:

- (1) Basic pay ` 40,000 p.m.
- (2) Dearness allowance (D.A.) ` 6,000 p.m.
- (3) Commission ` 50,000 p.a.
- (4) Motor car for personal use (expenses met by the employer) ` 1,500 p.m.
- (5) House rent allowance ` 15,000 p.m.

Find out the amount of HRA exempt in the hands of Mr. Raj Kumar assuming that he paid a rent of ` 16,000 p.m. for his accommodation at Kanpur. DA forms part of salary for retirement benefits. Mr. Raj Kumar exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.23 SOLUTION

HRA received ` 1,80,000

Less: Exempt under section 10(13A) [Note] ` 1,36,800

Taxable HRA ` 43,200

Note: Exemption shall be least of the following three limits:

1. the actual amount received (` 15,000 × 12) = ` 1,80,000
2. excess of the actual rent paid by the assessee over 10% of his salary

= Rent Paid (-) 10% of salary for the relevant period

= (` 16,000×12) (-) 10% of [(` 40,000+` 6,000) × 12]

= ` 1,92,000 - ` 55,200 = ` 1,36,800
3. 40% salary as his accommodation is situated at Kanpur

= 40% of [(` 40,000+ ` 6,000) × 12] = ` 2,20,800

Note: For the purpose of exemption under section 10(13A), salary includes dearness allowance only when the terms of employment so provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.

# (2) Special allowances to meet expenses relating to duties or personal expenses [Section 10(14)]

This clause provides for exemption (as per Rule 2BB) in respect of the following:

1. Special allowances or benefit, not being in the nature of a perquisite, specifically granted to meet expenses incurred wholly, necessarily and exclusively in the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit [Section 10(14)(i)]

These allowances would be exempt to that extent such expenses are actually incurred for that purpose. In other words, actual allowance received or actual amount spent for the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit, whichever is less would be exempt.
2. Special allowances granted to the assessee either to meet his personal expenses at the place where the duties of his office or employment of profit are ordinarily performed by him or at the place where he ordinarily resides or to compensate him for the increased cost of living [Section 10(14)(ii)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.24 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

For the allowances under this category, there is a limit on the amount which the employee can receive from the employer. Any amount received by the employee in excess of these specified limits will be taxable in his hands as income from salary for the year. It does not matter whether the amount which is received is actually spent or not by the employee for the purpose for which it was given to him.

# Rule 2BB

The following allowances have been prescribed in Rule 2BB:

# Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(i)

- (a) any allowance granted to meet the expenditure incurred on a helper where such helper is engaged in the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit (Helper Allowance);
- (b) any allowance granted for encouraging the academic, research and training pursuits in educational and research institutions (Research allowance);
- (c) any allowance granted to meet the expenditure on the purchase or maintenance of uniform for wear during the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit (Uniform Allowance).

# Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(ii)

|S. No.|Name of Allowance|Extent to which allowance is exempt|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Any Special Compensatory Allowance in the nature of Special Compensatory (Hilly Areas) Allowance or High Altitude Allowance or Uncongenial Climate Allowance or Snow Bound Area Allowance or Avalanche Allowance|₹ 800 or ₹ 300 per month depending upon the specified locations ₹ 7,000 per month in Siachen area of Jammu and Kashmir|
|2.|Any Special Compensatory Allowance in the nature of border area allowance or remote locality allowance or difficult area allowance or disturbed area allowance|₹ 1,300 or ₹ 1,100 or ₹ 1,050 or ₹ 750 or ₹ 300 or ₹ 200 per month depending upon the specified locations|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

|3.|Special Compensatory (Tribal Areas/Schedule Areas) Allowance [Specified States]|₹ 200 per month|
|---|---|---|
|4.|Any allowance granted to an employee working in any transport system to meet his personal expenditure during his duty performed in the course of running such transport from one place to another, provided that such employee is not in receipt of daily allowance|70% of such allowance upto a maximum of ₹ 10,000 per month|
|5.|Children Education Allowance|₹ 100 per month per child upto a maximum of two children|
|6.|Any allowance granted to an employee to meet the hostel expenditure on his child|₹ 300 per month per child upto a maximum of two children|
|7.|Compensatory Field Area Allowance [Specified areas in Specified States]|₹ 2,600 per month|
|8.|Compensatory Modified Field Area Allowance [Specified areas in Specified States]|₹ 1,000 per month|
|9.|Any special allowance in the nature of counter insurgency allowance granted to the members of the armed forces operating in areas away from their permanent locations.|₹ 3,900 per month|
|10.|Underground Allowance granted to an employee who is working in uncongenial, unnatural climate in underground mines.|₹ 800 per month|
|11.|Any special allowance in the nature of high Altitude allowance granted to the member of the armed forces operating in high altitude areas| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.26 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|For altitude of 9,000 to 15,000 feet|₹ 1,060 per month|
|---|---|
|For above 15,000 feet|₹ 1,600 per month|
|Any special allowance in the nature of special compensatory highly active field area allowance granted to the member of the armed forces|₹ 4,200 per month|
|Any special allowance in the nature of Island (duty) allowance granted to the member of the armed forces in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Group of Islands|₹ 3,250 per month|

Any assessee claiming exemption in respect of allowances mentioned at serial numbers 7 & 8 and 9 shall not be entitled to exemption in respect of the allowance and disturbed area allowance referred at serial number 2, respectively.

# (C) Allowances which are partly exempt under both regimes

The following allowances prescribed in Rule 2BB would be exempt under both the default and optional tax regimes:

# Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(i)

- any allowance granted to meet the cost of travel on tour or on transfer (Travelling Allowance);

Explanation - “allowance granted to meet the cost of travel on transfer” includes any sum paid in connection with the transfer, packing and transportation of personal effects on such transfer.
- any allowance, whether granted on tour or for the period of journey in connection with transfer, to meet the ordinary daily charges incurred by an employee on account of absence from his normal place of duty (Daily allowance);
- any allowance granted to meet the expenditure incurred on conveyance in performance of duties of an office or employment of profit (Conveyance Allowance);

# Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(ii)

Any transport allowance granted to an employee who is blind or deaf and dumb or orthopedically handicapped with disability of the lower extremities of the body, to
# SALARIES

meet his expenditure for commuting between his residence and place of duty would be exempt upto ` 3,200 per month.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. Srikant has two sons. He is in receipt of children education allowance of ` 150 p.m. for his elder son and ` 70 p.m. for his younger son. Both his sons are going to school. He also receives the following allowances:

|Transport allowance|` 1,800 p.m.|
|---|---|
|Tribal area allowance|` 500 p.m.|

Compute his taxable allowances

# SOLUTION

Taxable allowance in the hands of Mr. Srikant is computed as under -

If Mr. Srikant exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

|Children Education Allowance:|Elder son [(` 150 – ` 100) p.m. × 12 months]|= ` 600|
|---|---|---|
| |Younger son [(` 70 – ` 70) p.m. × 12 months]|= Nil|
| | |` 600|
|Transport allowance|(` 1,800 p.m. × 12 months)|` 21,600|
|Tribal area allowance|[(` 500 – ` 200) p.m. × 12 months]|` 3,600|
|Taxable allowances| |` 25,800|

If Mr. Srikant pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Children Education Allowance|[(` 150 + ` 70) p.m. × 12 months]|` 2,640|
|---|---|---|
|Transport allowance|(` 1,800 p.m. × 12 months)|` 21,600|
|Tribal area allowance|(` 500 p.m. × 12 months)|` 6,000|
|Taxable allowances| |` 30,240|

# (D) Allowances which are fully exempt only under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)

1. Allowance to Supreme Court/ High Court Judges: Any allowance paid to a Judge of a High Court and Supreme Court under section 22A(2) of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and section 23(1A) of the
# 3.28 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of services) Act, 1958, respectively, is not taxable under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act).

1. Allowance received from United Nations Organisation (UNO): Salary and Allowance paid by the UNO to its employees is not taxable by virtue of section 2 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947. Besides salary, any pension covered under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act and received from UNO is also exempt from tax under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act).
2. Sumptuary allowance: Sumptuary allowance given to High Court Judges under section 22C of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and Supreme Court Judges under section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 is not chargeable to tax under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act).

Note – In cases (1) and (3) above, the respective Acts provide for such exemption, notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. In case (2), exemption is provided under the respective Act, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law.

# Allowances which are fully exempt under both regimes

Allowances payable outside India [Section 10(7)]: Allowances or perquisites paid or allowed as such outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for services rendered outside India are exempt from tax.

# Annuity or Pension

# Meaning of Annuity

- As per the definition, ‘annuity’ is treated as salary. Annuity is a sum payable in respect of a particular year. It is a yearly grant. If a person invests some money entitling him to series of equal annual sums, such annual sums are annuities in the hands of the investor.
- Annuity received by a present employer is to be taxed as salary. It does not matter whether it is paid in pursuance of a contractual obligation or voluntarily.
- Annuity received from a past employer is taxable as profit in lieu of salary.
- Annuity received from person other than an employer is taxable as “income from other sources”.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Pension

Concise Oxford Dictionary defines ‘pension’ as a periodic payment made especially by Government or a company or other employers to the employee in consideration of past service payable after his retirement.

Pension is of two types: commuted and uncommuted.

- Uncommuted Pension: Uncommuted pension refers to pension received periodically. It is fully taxable in the hands of both government and non-government employees.
- Commuted Pension: Commutation means inter-change. Commuted pension means lump sum amount taken by commuting the whole or part of the pension. Many persons convert their future right to receive pension into a lumpsum amount receivable immediately.

Example:

Suppose a person is entitled to receive a pension of say ` 10,000 p.m. for the rest of his life. He may commute ¼th i.e., 25% of this amount and get a lumpsum of say ` 1,50,000. After commutation, his pension will now be the balance 75% of ` 10,000 p.m. = ` 7,500 p.m.

# Exemption in respect of Commuted Pension [Section 10(10A)]

As per section 10(10A), the payment in respect of commuted pension is exempt, subject to the conditions specified therein. Its tax treatment is depicted hereunder:

|Pension|Commuted|Uncommuted| |
|---|---|---|---|
|Employees of the Central Government/ local authorities/ Statutory Corporation/ members of Civil Services/ Defence Services etc.|Other Employees|Fully taxable| |
| |Fully exempt u/s 10(10A)(i)|1/3 x (commuted pension received ÷ commutation %) x 100, would be exempt u/s 10(10A)(ii)(a)|1/2 x (commuted pension received ÷ commutation %) x 100, would be exempt u/s 10(10A)(ii)(b)|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.30 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

- Exemption u/s 10(10A) in respect of commuted pension is available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
- Judges of the Supreme Court and High Court will be entitled to the exemption of the commuted portion u/s 10(10A)(i).

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Mr. Sagar who retired on 1.10.2023 is receiving ` 5,000 p.m. as pension. On 1.2.2024, he commuted 60% of his pension and received ` 3,00,000 as commuted pension. You are required to compute his taxable pension assuming:

1. He is a government employee.
2. He is a private sector employee and received gratuity of ` 5,00,000 at the time of retirement.
3. He is a private sector employee and did not receive any gratuity at the time of retirement.

# SOLUTION

# (a) He is a government employee

|Uncommuted pension received (October – March)|` 24,000|
|---|---|
|[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]| |
|Commuted pension received|` 3,00,000|
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A)|` 3,00,000|
| |NIL|
|Taxable pension|` 24,000|

# (b) He is a private sector employee and received gratuity ` 5,00,000 at the time of retirement

|Uncommuted pension received (October – March)|` 24,000| |
|---|---|---|
|[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]| | |
|Commuted pension received|` 3,00,000| |
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A)|<br/> 1 × ` 3,00,000 ×100%|` 1,66,667|
| 3 60%|` 1,33,333| |
| | | |

Taxable pension
` 1,57,333

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(c) He is a private sector employee and did not receive any gratuity at the time of retirement

Uncommuted pension received (October – March)  ` 24,000

[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]

Commuted pension received  ` 3,00,000

Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A)

|Exemption|Amount|Taxable Amount| |
|---|---|---|---|
| ` 2,50,000| ` 50,000| | |

Taxable pension  ` 74,000

# Exemption in respect of pension received by recipient of gallantry awards [Section 10(18)]

Any income by way of pension received by an individual is exempt from income-tax if –

1. such individual was an employee of Central or State Government and
2. has been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or such other gallantry award notified by the Central Government in this behalf.

In case of the death of such individual, any income by way of family pension received by any member of the family of such individual shall also be exempt under this clause.

“Family”, in relation to an individual, means –

- The spouse and children of the individual; and
- The parents, brothers and sisters of the individuals or any of them, wholly or mainly dependent on the individual.

Exemption under section 10(18) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# Exemption of disability pension granted to disabled personnel of armed forces who have been invalided on account of disability attributable to or aggravated by such service [Circular No. 13/2019, dated 24.6.2019]

The entire disability pension, i.e., “disability element” and “service element” of pension granted to members of naval, military or air forces who have been invalided out of naval, military or air force service on account of bodily disability attributable to or aggravated by such service would be exempt from tax.

The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that exemption in respect of disability pension would be available to all armed forces personnel (irrespective of rank) who have been invalided out of such service on account of bodily disability attributable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.32 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

to or aggravated by such service. However, such tax exemption will be available only to armed forces personnel who have been invalided out of service on account of bodily disability attributable to or aggravated by such service and not to personnel who have been retired on superannuation or otherwise.

# (3) Gratuity

Gratuity is a voluntary payment made by an employer in appreciation of services rendered by the employee. Now-a-days gratuity has become a normal payment applicable to all employees. In fact, Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is a statutory recognition of the concept of gratuity. Almost all employers enter into an agreement with employees to pay gratuity.

# Exemption in respect of Gratuity [Section 10(10)]

|Gratuity|Received during service|Received at the time of retirement/Death|
|---|---|---|
|Fully Taxable|Received under the Pension Code or Regulations applicable to members of the Defence Service/ Employees of Central Government/ Members of Civil Services/ local authority employees etc.|Covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972|
| |Least of the following would be exempt u/s 10(10)(ii):|Least of the following would be exempt u/s 10(10)(iii):|
| |- ` 20 lakh|- ` 20 lakh|
| |- Actual gratuity received|- Actual gratuity received|
| |- 15 days' salary$ (based on last drawn salary) for every completed year of service or part in excess of 6 months (No. of days in a month to be taken as 26)|- Half month salary# (based on avg of last 10 months salary) for every completed year of service (fraction to be ignored)|

*Any death cum retirement gratuity received by an employee on his retirement or his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement or on his termination or any gratuity received by his widow, children or dependents on his death.

$ Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance. No. of days in a month for this purpose, shall be taken as 26.

#Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the terms of employment for retirement benefits, forming part of salary and commission which is expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Where gratuity is received from 2 or more employers in the same previous year, then, aggregate amount of gratuity exempt from tax cannot exceed ` 20,00,000.

Where gratuity is received in any earlier previous year from former employer and again received from another employer in a later previous year, the limit of ` 20,00,000 will be reduced by the amount of gratuity exempt earlier.

It is important to note the difference in definition of “Salary” and the manner of computation of the third limit in case of employees covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and those not covered for determining the amount of exempt gratuity.

Exemption under section 10(10) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. Ravi retired on 15.6.2023 after completion of 26 years 8 months of service and received gratuity of ` 15,00,000. At the time of retirement, his salary was:

|Basic Salary|: ` 50,000 p.m.|
|---|---|
|Dearness Allowance|: ` 10,000 p.m. (60% of which is for retirement benefits)|
|Commission|: 1% of turnover (turnover in the last 12 months was ` 1,20,00,000)|
|Bonus|: ` 25,000 p.a.|

Compute his taxable gratuity assuming:

1. He is private sector employee and covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
2. He is private sector employee and not covered by Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
3. He is a Government employee.

# SOLUTION

(a) He is covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act 1972

Gratuity received at the time of retirement: ` 15,00,000

Less: Exemption under section 10(10)
# 3.34 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Least of the following:

1. Gratuity received ` 15,00,000
2. Statutory limit ` 20,00,000
3. 15 days’ salary based on last drawn salary for each completed year of service or part thereof in excess of 6 months

15 × last drawn salary × years of service

15 × (50,000 + 10,000) x 27= ` 9,34,615

Taxable Gratuity ` 5,65,385

(b) He is not covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act 1972

Gratuity received at the time of retirement ` 15,00,000

Less: Exemption under section 10(10) (Note) ` 8,58,000

Taxable Gratuity ` 6,42,000

Note: Exemption under section 10(10) is least of the following:

1. Gratuity received ` 15,00,000
2. Statutory limit ` 20,00,000
3. Half month’s salary based on average salary of last 10 months preceding the month of retirement for each completed year of service.

i.e. 1 × Average salary × years of service

2

⎡(50,000×10)+ (10,000×60% ×10)+ ⎛1% ×1,20,00,000× 10 ⎞⎤

1 ⎢ ⎜ 12 ⎟ ⎥

= 2 × ⎣ 10 ⎦ × 26

= ` 8,58,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(c) He is a government employee

|Gratuity received at the time of retirement|₹ 15,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Exemption under section 10(10)|₹ 15,00,000|
|Taxable gratuity|Nil|

# (4) Fees, commission, perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to any salary or wages

The payment in the form of fees or commission by the employer to the employee are fully taxable. Commission may be paid as fixed percentage of turnover or net profits etc.

Section 17(2) and 17(3) contains the provisions relating to perquisites and profits in lieu of salary, respectively. The provisions of these sections would be discussed in detail separately in this unit.

# (5) Any Advance of Salary

The treatment of “Advance Salary” is already discussed in this unit.

# (6) Leave Salary or Leave Encashment

Generally, employees are allowed to take leave during the period of service. Employee may avail such leave or in case the leave is not availed, then the leave may either lapse or be accumulated for future or allowed to be encashed every year or at the time termination/ retirement. The payment received on account of encashment of unavailed leave would form part of salary. However, section 10(10AA) provides exemption in respect of amount received by way of encashment of unutilised earned leave by an employee at the time of his retirement, whether on superannuation or otherwise.

# Exemption of amount received by way of encashment of unutilised earned leave on retirement [Section 10(10AA)]

The taxability and exemption provisions are depicted hereunder:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.36 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Leave Encashment

|Received during the period of service|Received on retirement, whether on superannuation or otherwise|
|---|---|
|Fully Taxable|By a Government employee|
| |Fully exempt u/s 10(10AA)(i)|
|₹ 25,00,000 Leave salary actually received|Least of the following is exempt u/s 10(10AA)(ii)|
| |10 months' salary (on the basis of average salary of last 10 months preceding retirement)|
| |Cash equivalent of unavailed leave (Based on last 10 months average salary) to his credit at the time of retirement|

Earned leave entitlement cannot exceed 30 days for every year of actual service rendered for the employer from whose service he has retired.

- Where leave salary is received from two or more employers in the same previous year, then the aggregate amount of leave salary exempt from tax cannot exceed ₹ 25,00,000.
- Where leave salary is received in any earlier previous year from a former employer and again received from another employer in a later previous year, the limit of ₹ 25,00,000 will be reduced by the amount of leave salary exempt earlier.
- Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the terms of employment for retirement benefits and commission which is expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.
- ‘Average salary’ will be determined on the basis of the salary drawn during the period of ten months immediately preceding the date of his retirement whether on superannuation or otherwise.
- Exemption under section 10(10AA) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Mr. Gupta retired on 1.12.2023 after 20 years of service and received leave salary of ` 5,00,000. Other details of his salary income are:

- Basic Salary: ` 5,000 p.m. (` 1,000 was increased w.e.f. 1.4.2023)
- Dearness Allowance: ` 3,000 p.m. (60% of which is for retirement benefits)
- Commission: ` 500 p.m.
- Bonus: ` 1,000 p.m.
- Leave availed during service: 480 days
- He was entitled to 30 days leave every year.

You are required to compute his taxable leave salary assuming:

1. He is a government employee.
2. He is a non-government employee.

# SOLUTION

(a) He is a government employee

|Leave Salary received at the time of retirement|` 5,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Exemption under section 10(10AA)|` 5,00,000|
|Taxable Leave salary|Nil|

(b) He is a non-government employee

|Leave Salary received at the time of retirement|` 5,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Exempt under section 10(10AA) [See Note below]|` 26,400|
|Taxable Leave Salary|` 4,73,600|

Note: Exemption under section 10(10AA) is least of the following:

1. Leave salary received: ` 5,00,000
2. Statutory limit: ` 25,00,000
3. 10 months’ salary based on average salary of last 10 months i.e.
10 x Salary of last 10 months i.e. Feb. - Nov.10 months

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.38 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

10 × (5000×8)+(4000×2)+(60%×3000×10)

= 10 months  ` 66,000

(iv) Cash equivalent of leave standing at the credit of the employee based on the average salary of last 10 months’ (max. 30 days per year of service)

Leave Due = Leave allowed – Leave taken

= (30 days per year × 20 years) – 480 days = 120 days

i.e. Leave due (in days) × Average salary p.m.

30 days

= 120 days × ` 66,000

30 days 10

=  ` 26,400

# (7) Provident fund

Provident fund scheme is a scheme intended to give substantial benefits to an employee at the time of his retirement. Under this scheme, a specified sum is deducted from the salary of the employee each month or at regular intervals as his contribution towards the fund. The employer also generally contributes the same amount out of his pocket, to the fund. The contributions of the employer and the employee are invested in approved securities. Interest earned thereon is also credited to the account of the employee. Thus, the credit balance in a provident fund account of an employee consists of the following:

1. employee’s contribution
2. interest on employee’s contribution
3. employer’s contribution
4. interest on employer’s contribution.

The accumulated balance is paid to the employee at the time of his retirement or resignation. In the case of death of the employee, the same is paid to his legal heirs. The provident fund represents an important source of small savings available to the Government. Hence, the Income-tax Act, 1961 gives certain deductions on savings in a provident fund account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# Types of Provident Funds

|Recognised Provident Fund (RPF)|Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF)|Statutory Provident Fund (SPF)|Public Provident Fund (PPF)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) Recognised Provident Fund (RPF): Recognised provident fund means a provident fund recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax for the purposes of income-tax. It is governed by Part A of Schedule IV to the Income-tax Act, 1961. This schedule contains various rules regarding the following: - (a) Recognition of the fund
- (b) Employee’s and employer’s contribution to the fund
- (c) Treatment of accumulated balance etc.
A fund constituted under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 will also be a Recognised Provident Fund.|(i) Recognised Provident Fund (RPF): Recognised provident fund means a provident fund recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax for the purposes of income-tax. It is governed by Part A of Schedule IV to the Income-tax Act, 1961. This schedule contains various rules regarding the following: - (a) Recognition of the fund
- (b) Employee’s and employer’s contribution to the fund
- (c) Treatment of accumulated balance etc.
A fund constituted under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 will also be a Recognised Provident Fund.|(i) Recognised Provident Fund (RPF): Recognised provident fund means a provident fund recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax for the purposes of income-tax. It is governed by Part A of Schedule IV to the Income-tax Act, 1961. This schedule contains various rules regarding the following: - (a) Recognition of the fund
- (b) Employee’s and employer’s contribution to the fund
- (c) Treatment of accumulated balance etc.
A fund constituted under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 will also be a Recognised Provident Fund.|(i) Recognised Provident Fund (RPF): Recognised provident fund means a provident fund recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax for the purposes of income-tax. It is governed by Part A of Schedule IV to the Income-tax Act, 1961. This schedule contains various rules regarding the following: - (a) Recognition of the fund
- (b) Employee’s and employer’s contribution to the fund
- (c) Treatment of accumulated balance etc.
A fund constituted under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 will also be a Recognised Provident Fund.|
|(ii) Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF): A fund not recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax is Unrecognised Provident Fund.|(ii) Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF): A fund not recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax is Unrecognised Provident Fund.|(ii) Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF): A fund not recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax is Unrecognised Provident Fund.|(ii) Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF): A fund not recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax is Unrecognised Provident Fund.|
|(iii) Statutory Provident Fund (SPF): The SPF is governed by Provident Funds Act, 1925. It applies to employees of government, railways, semi-government institutions, local bodies, universities and all recognised educational institutions.|(iii) Statutory Provident Fund (SPF): The SPF is governed by Provident Funds Act, 1925. It applies to employees of government, railways, semi-government institutions, local bodies, universities and all recognised educational institutions.|(iii) Statutory Provident Fund (SPF): The SPF is governed by Provident Funds Act, 1925. It applies to employees of government, railways, semi-government institutions, local bodies, universities and all recognised educational institutions.|(iii) Statutory Provident Fund (SPF): The SPF is governed by Provident Funds Act, 1925. It applies to employees of government, railways, semi-government institutions, local bodies, universities and all recognised educational institutions.|
|(iv) Public Provident Fund (PPF): Public provident fund is operated under the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. A membership of the fund is open to every individual though it is ideally suited to self-employed people. A salaried employee may also contribute to PPF in addition to the fund operated by his employer. An individual may contribute to the fund on his own behalf as also on behalf of a minor of whom he is the guardian. For getting a deduction under section 80C, a member is required to contribute to the PPF a minimum of ` 500 in a year. The maximum amount that may qualify for deduction on this account is ` 1,50,000 as per PPF rules.|(iv) Public Provident Fund (PPF): Public provident fund is operated under the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. A membership of the fund is open to every individual though it is ideally suited to self-employed people. A salaried employee may also contribute to PPF in addition to the fund operated by his employer. An individual may contribute to the fund on his own behalf as also on behalf of a minor of whom he is the guardian. For getting a deduction under section 80C, a member is required to contribute to the PPF a minimum of ` 500 in a year. The maximum amount that may qualify for deduction on this account is ` 1,50,000 as per PPF rules.|(iv) Public Provident Fund (PPF): Public provident fund is operated under the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. A membership of the fund is open to every individual though it is ideally suited to self-employed people. A salaried employee may also contribute to PPF in addition to the fund operated by his employer. An individual may contribute to the fund on his own behalf as also on behalf of a minor of whom he is the guardian. For getting a deduction under section 80C, a member is required to contribute to the PPF a minimum of ` 500 in a year. The maximum amount that may qualify for deduction on this account is ` 1,50,000 as per PPF rules.|(iv) Public Provident Fund (PPF): Public provident fund is operated under the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. A membership of the fund is open to every individual though it is ideally suited to self-employed people. A salaried employee may also contribute to PPF in addition to the fund operated by his employer. An individual may contribute to the fund on his own behalf as also on behalf of a minor of whom he is the guardian. For getting a deduction under section 80C, a member is required to contribute to the PPF a minimum of ` 500 in a year. The maximum amount that may qualify for deduction on this account is ` 1,50,000 as per PPF rules.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.40 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

A member of PPF may deposit his contribution in as many installments in multiples of ` 500 as is convenient to him. The amount of contribution may be paid at any of the offices or branch offices of the State Bank of India or its subsidiaries and specified branches of banks or any Post Office.

The tax treatment is given below:

# During the Employment period

|Particulars|Recognised PF|Unrecognised PF|Statutory PF|Public PF|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Employer’s Contribution|Not taxable at the time of contribution|Fully exempt|N.A. (as there is only assessee’s own contribution)| |
|Employee’s Contribution|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|Not eligible for deduction|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|
|Interest Credited on Employer’s Contribution|Amount in excess of 9.5% p.a. is taxable as “salary” u/s 17(1)|Not taxable at the time of credit of interest| | |
|Interest Credited on Employee’s Contribution|Amount in excess of 9.5% p.a. is taxable as “salary” u/s 17(1) [See Note below]|Not taxable at the time of credit of interest|Exempt up to certain limit of contribution [See Note below]|Fully exempt|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Amount

|Exempt u/s 10(12)|Employee’s contribution is not taxable.|
|---|---|
|Exempt u/s 10(11)|• Interest on Employee’s contribution is taxable under ‘Income from Other Sources’.|
|Fully exempt u/s 10(11)|• Employer’s contribution and interest thereon is salary.|

Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the terms of employment for retirement benefits and commission as a percentage of turnover.

Note - Interest credited on contribution by such person/employee

As per section 10(11), any payment from a Provident Fund (PF) to which Provident Fund Act, 1925, applies or from Public Provident Fund would be exempt.

Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participating in a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be exempt under section 10(12).

However, the exemption under section 10(11) or 10(12) would not be available in respect of income by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by that person/employee exceeding ` 2,50,000 in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2021.

If the contribution by such person/employee is in a fund in which there is no employer’s contribution, then, a higher limit of ` 5,00,000 would be applicable for such contribution, and interest accrued in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2021 would be exempt up to that limit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.42 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

It may be noted that interest accrued on contribution to such funds upto 31st March, 2021 would be exempt without any limit, even if the accrual of income is after that date.

Exemption under section 10(11) and 10(12) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

The CBDT has, vide Rule 9D, notified the manner to calculate taxable interest relating to contribution in a provident fund or recognized provident fund, exceeding threshold limit.

Interest income accrued during the previous year which is not exempt from inclusion in the total income of a person (taxable interest) shall be computed as the interest accrued during the previous year in the taxable contribution account.

For this purpose, separate accounts within the provident fund account shall be maintained during the previous year 2021-22 and all subsequent previous years for taxable contribution and non-taxable contribution made by a person.

1. Non-taxable contribution account – Aggregate of

1. closing balance in the account as on 31.03.2021;
2. any contribution made by the person in the account during the previous year 2021-22 and subsequent previous years, which is not included in the taxable contribution account;
3. interest accrued on (i) and (ii), as reduced by the withdrawal, if any, from such account.
2. Taxable contribution account – Aggregate of

1. contribution made by the person in the account during the previous year 2021-22 and subsequent previous years, which is in excess of the yearly threshold limit;
2. interest accrued on (i) as reduced by the withdrawal, if any, from such account.

Yearly threshold limit is ` 5,00,000, if the contribution by such person/employee is in a fund in which there is no employer’s contribution and ` 2,50,000 in other cases.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.43

Exemption of Accumulated balance of RPF, payable to an employee

Has the employee rendered continuous service of at least 5 years with the employer?

|YES|NO|
|---|---|
|Exempt|Are his services terminated due to (i) his ill-health (ii) contraction or discontinuance of employer’s business or (iii) any other cause beyond the control of the employee?|
|Yes|No|
|Exempt| |

Is the entire balance standing to the credit of the employee transferred to his individual account in any RPF maintained with his new employer?

|Yes|No|
|---|---|
|Exempt|Taxable*|

Is the entire balance standing to the credit of the employee transferred to his NPS account referred to in section 80CCD and notified by the Central Government?

|Yes|No|
|---|---|
|Exempt| |

* Where the accumulated balance in RPF becomes taxable, the tax payable in each of the years would be computed as if the fund had been an URPF and the difference in tax would be payable by the employee.

Note: If, after termination of his employment with one employer, the employee obtains employment under another employer, then, only so much of the accumulated balance in his provident fund account will be exempt which is transferred to his individual account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.44 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

account in a recognised provident fund maintained by the new employer. In such a case, for exemption of payment of accumulated balance by the new employer, the period of service with the former employer shall also be taken into account for computing the period of five years’ continuous service.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Mr. A retires from service on December 31, 2023, after 25 years of service. Following are the particulars of his income/investments for the previous year 2023-24:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic pay @ ` 16,000 per month for 9 months|1,44,000|
|Dearness pay (50% forms part of the retirement benefits) ` 8,000 per month for 9 months|72,000|
|Lumpsum payment received from the Unrecognized Provident Fund|6,00,000|
|Deposits in the PPF account|40,000|

Out of the amount received from the unrecognised provident fund, the employer’s contribution was ` 2,20,000 and the interest thereon ` 50,000. The employee’s contribution was ` 2,70,000 and the interest thereon ` 60,000. What is the taxable portion of the amount received from the unrecognized provident fund in the hands of Mr. A for the assessment year 2024-25?

# SOLUTION

Taxable portion of the amount received from the URPF in the hands of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2024-25 is computed hereunder:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Amount taxable under the head “Salaries”:| |
|Employer’s share in the payment received from the URPF|2,20,000|
|Interest on the employer’s share|50,000|
|Total|2,70,000|
|Amount taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources”:| |
|Interest on the employee’s share|60,000|
|Total amount taxable from the amount received from the fund|3,30,000|

Note: Since the employee is not eligible for deduction under section 80C for contribution to URPF at the time of such contribution, the employee’s share received from the URPF

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

is not taxable at the time of withdrawal as this amount has already been taxed as his salary income.

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Will your answer be any different if the fund mentioned above was a recognised provident fund?

# SOLUTION

Since the fund is a recognised one, and the maturity is taking place after a service of 25 years, the entire amount received on the maturity of the RPF will be fully exempt from tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Mr. B is working in XYZ Ltd. and has given the details of his income for the P.Y. 2023-24. You are required to compute his gross salary from the details given below:

|Basic Salary|` 10,000 p.m.|
|---|---|
|D.A. (50% is for retirement benefits)|` 8,000 p.m.|
|Commission as a percentage of turnover|0.1%|
|Turnover during the year|` 50,00,000|
|Bonus|` 40,000|
|Gratuity|` 25,000|
|His own contribution in the RPF|` 20,000|
|Employer’s contribution to RPF|20% of his basic salary|
|Interest accrued in the RPF @ 13% p.a.|` 13,000|

# SOLUTION

Computation of Gross Salary of Mr. B for the A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Basic Salary [ ` 10,000 × 12]|1,20,000| |
|Dearness Allowance [` 8,000 × 12]|96,000| |
|Commission on turnover [0.1% × ` 50,00,000]|5,000| |
|Bonus|40,000| |
|Gratuity [Note 1]|25,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.46 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Employers contribution to RPF [20% of ` 1,20,000]| |24,000| |
|---|---|---|---|
|Less: Exempt [Note 2]| |20,760|3,240|
|Interest accrued in the RPF@13% p.a.| |13,000| |
|Less: Exempt@9.5% p.a.| |9,500|3,500|
|Gross Salary| | |2,92,740|

# Notes:

1. Gratuity received during service is fully taxable.
2. Employers’ contribution in the RPF is exempt up to 12% of the salary i.e., 12% of [Basic Salary + Dearness Allowance forming part of retirement benefits + Commission based on turnover] = 12% of [` 1,20,000 + (50% × ` 96,000) + ` 5,000] = 12% of ` 1,73,000 = ` 20,760
3. Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction under section 80C, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(8) The contribution made by the Central Government or any other employer in the previous year to the account of an employee under a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD National Pension scheme is a scheme approved by the Government for Indian citizen aged between 18-70 years. Subscriber of the NPS account contributes some amount in their account. In case of any employee, being a subscriber of the NPS account, employer may also contribute into the employee’s account. Employer’s contribution to NPS account would form part of salary of employees under section 17(1). However, while computing total income of the employee-assessee, a deduction under section 80CCD is allowed to the assessee in respect of the employer’s as well as employee’s contribution under a pension scheme referred therein. (Deduction under section 80CCD will be discussed in detail in Chapter 6 – “Deductions from Gross Total Income”)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Deduction under section 80CCD(2) in respect of employer’s contribution would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax. However, deduction under section 80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect of employee’s contribution would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(9) The contribution made by the Central Government in the previous year, to the Agniveer Corpus Fund account of an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 80CCH.

Agnipath Scheme is a Central Government Scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment of Indian youth in the Indian Armed Forces as Agniveers for four years to serve the country.

In pursuance of the Government's decision to implement the Agnipath Scheme, 2022, the Competent Authority has decided to create a non-lapsable dedicated Agniveer Corpus Fund in the interest-bearing section of the Public Account head.

In this account, fixed percentage of monthly emoluments would be contributed by the Agniveer and matching amount would be contributed by the Central Government.

The Agniveer Corpus Fund is defined as a Fund in which consolidated contributions of all the Agniveers and matching contributions of the Government along with interest on these contributions would be held in their respective accounts.

Central Government’s contribution to Agniveer Corpus Fund account would form part of salary of employees under section 17(1).

However, while computing total income of an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme, being the assessee, a deduction under section 80CCH is allowed to the assessee in respect of his contribution as well as Central Government’s contribution under Agniveer Corpus Fund referred therein. (Deduction under section 80CCH will be discussed in detail in Chapter 6 – “Deductions from Gross Total Income”)

Deduction under section 80CCH(2) in respect of Central Government’s contribution would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax. However, deduction under section 80CCH(1) in respect of employee’s contribution would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 1.3.2 Profits in lieu of salary [Section 17(3)]

It includes the following:

1. Compensation on account of termination of his employment

The amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee from his employer or former employer at or in connection with the termination of his employment.
2. Compensation on account of modification of the terms and conditions of employment

The amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee from his employer or former employer at or in connection with the modification of the terms and conditions of employment.

Usually, such compensation is treated as a capital receipt. However, by virtue of this provision, the same is treated as a revenue receipt and is chargeable as salary.

Note: It is to be noted that merely because a payment is made by an employer to a person who is his employee does not automatically fall within the scope of the above provisions. The payment must be arising due to master-servant relationship between the payer and the payee. If it is not on that account, but due to considerations totally unconnected with employment, such payment is not profit in lieu of salary.
3. Payment from provident fund or other fund

Any payment due to or received by an assessee from his employer or former employer from a provident or other fund other than:

- Gratuity [Section 10(10)]
- Pension [Section 10(10A)]
- Compensation received by a workman under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 [Section 10(10B)]
- from provident fund or public provident fund [Section 10(11)]
- from recognized provident fund [Section 10(12)]
- from approved superannuation fund [Section 10(13)]
- any House Rent Allowance [Section 10(13A)],

to the extent to which it does not consist of employee’s contributions or interest on such contributions.

Note: If any sum is paid to an employee at the time of maturity from an unrecognised provident fund it is to be dealt with as follows:

1. that part of the sum which represents the employer’s contribution to the fund and interest thereon is taxable under the head “Salaries”.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(b) that part of the sum which represents employee’s contribution is not chargeable to tax as no deduction or exemption was available at the time of contribution.

(c) that part of the sum which represents the interest on employee’s contribution is chargeable to tax as ‘Income from other sources’.

# (iv) Keyman Insurance policy

Any sum received by an assessee under a Key man Insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy.

# (v) Lump sum Payment or otherwise

Any amount, whether in lump sum or otherwise, due to the assessee or received by him, from any person -

(a) before joining employment with that person, or

(b) after cessation of his employment with that person.

# (1) Retrenchment compensation [Section 10(10B)]

The retrenchment compensation means the compensation paid under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or under any Act, Rule, Order or Notification issued under any law. It also includes compensation paid on transfer of employment under section 25F or closing down of an undertaking under section 25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

It may be noted that compensation on account of termination and due to modification in terms and conditions of employment would be taxable as “profits in lieu of salary”. However, the retrenchment compensation would be exempt under section 10(10B), subject to following limits.

(a) Amount calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 i.e., 15 days average pay x completed years of service and part thereof in excess of 6 months

(or)

(b) An amount, not less than ` 5,00,000 as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, whichever is lower.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# Notes:

1. The above limits will not be applicable to cases where the compensation is paid under any scheme approved by the Central Government for giving special protection to workmen under certain circumstances.
2. Average pay means average of the wages payable to a workman
- in the case of monthly paid workman, in the three complete calendar months,
- in the case of weekly paid workman, in the four calendar weeks,
- in the case of daily paid workman, in the twelve full working weeks,

preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three complete calendar months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, as the case may be, and where such calculation cannot be made, the average pay shall be calculated as the average of the wages payable to a workman during the period he actually worked.
3. Wages for this purpose means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and includes
- such allowances including DA as the workman is for the time being entitled to;
- the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any other service or of any concessional supply of food grains or other articles;
- any travel concession; and
- any commission payable on the promotion of sales or business or both.

However, it does not include
- any bonus;
- contribution to a retirement benefit scheme;
- any gratuity payable on the termination of his service.
4. Exemption under section 10(10B) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# (2) Voluntary Retirement Receipts [Section 10(10C)]

Lump sum payment or otherwise received by an employee at the time of voluntary retirement would be taxable as “profits in lieu of salary”. However, it would be exempt under section 10(10C), subject to the following conditions:

# Eligible Undertakings

The employees of the following undertakings are eligible for exemption under this clause:

1. Public sector company
2. Any other company
3. An authority established under a Central/State or Provincial Act
4. A local authority
5. A co-operative society
6. An University established or incorporated under a Central/State or Provincial Act and an Institution declared to be an University by the University Grants Commission
7. An Indian Institute of Technology
8. Such Institute of Management as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf
9. Any State Government
10. The Central Government
11. An institution, having importance throughout India or in any State or States, as the Central Government may specify by notification in the Official Gazette.

# Limit

The maximum limit of exemption should not exceed ` 5 lakh. Such compensation should be at the time of his voluntary retirement or termination of his service, in accordance with any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement or, in the case of public sector company, a scheme of voluntary separation. The exemption will be available even if such compensation is received in installments.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.52 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Guidelines:

The schemes should be framed in accordance with such guidelines, as may be prescribed and should include the criteria of economic viability.

Rule 2BA prescribes that the exemption under this section would be available to an employee who has completed 10 years of service or completed 40 years of age. However, this requirement is not applicable in case of an employee of a public sector company under the scheme of voluntary separation framed by the company.

The amount receivable on account of voluntary retirement or separation of the employee must not exceed -

- the amount equivalent to three months’ salary for each completed year of service or
- salary at the time of retirement multiplied by the balance months of service left before the date of his retirement or superannuation.

• Where any relief has been allowed to any assessee u/s 89 for any A.Y. in respect of any amount received or receivable on his voluntary retirement or termination of service or voluntary separation, no exemption u/s 10(10C) shall be allowed to him in relation to that A.Y. or any other A.Y.

• Where exemption for voluntary retirement compensation under section 10(10C) has been allowed in any A.Y., then no exemption thereunder shall be allowed to him in any other A.Y.

• “Salary” for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the terms of employment for retirement benefits, forming part of salary and commission which is expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.

• Exemption under section 10(10C) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. Dutta received voluntary retirement compensation of ` 7,00,000 after 30 years 4 months of service. He still has 6 years of service left. At the time of voluntary retirement, he was drawing basic salary ` 20,000 p.m.; Dearness allowance (which forms part of pay) ` 5,000 p.m. Compute his taxable voluntary retirement compensation, assuming that he does not claim any relief under section 89.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# SOLUTION

|Voluntary retirement compensation received|` 7,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Exemption under section 10(10C) [See Note below]|` 5,00,000|
|Taxable voluntary retirement compensation|` 2,00,000|

Note: Exemption is to the extent of least of the following:

1. Compensation actually received =  ` 7,00,000
2. Statutory limit =  ` 5,00,000
3. 3 months’ salary × completed years of service = (` 20,000 + ` 5,000) × 3 × 30 years = ` 22,50,000
4. Last drawn salary × remaining months of service left = (` 20,000 + ` 5,000) × 6 × 12 months = ` 18,00,000

# 1.3.3 Perquisites

The term ‘perquisite’ indicates some extra benefit in addition to the amount that may be legally due by way of contract for services rendered. In modern times, the salary package of an employee normally includes monetary salary and perquisites like housing, car etc.

- Perquisite may be provided in cash or in kind.
- Reimbursement of expenses incurred in the official discharge of duties is not a perquisite.
- Perquisite may arise in the course of employment or in the course of profession. If it arises from a relationship of employer-employee, then the value of the perquisite is taxable as salary. However, if it arises during the course of profession, the value of such perquisite is chargeable as profits and gains of business or profession.
- Perquisite will become taxable only if it has a legal origin. An unauthorised advantage taken by an employee without his employer’s sanction cannot be considered as a perquisite under the Act.

Example: Mr. A, an employee, is given a house by his employer. On 31.3.2024, he is terminated from service, but he continues to occupy the house without the permission of the employer for six more months after which he is evicted by the employer.
# 3.54 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

employer. The question arises whether the value of the benefit enjoyed by him during the six months period can be considered as a perquisite and be charged to salary. It cannot be done since the relationship of employer-employee ceased to exist after 31.3.2024. However, the definition of income is wide enough to bring the value of the benefit enjoyed by Mr. A to tax as “Income from other sources”.

# (1) Definition of “Perquisite”

The term “perquisite” is defined under section 17(2). The definition of perquisite is an inclusive one. Based on the definition, perquisites can be classified in following three ways:

# Types of Perquisites

|Perquisites taxable in the case of all employees|Tax free perquisites in case of all employees|Perquisites taxable only in the hands of specified employees|
|---|---|---|
|(A) Perquisites taxable in the case of all employees| | |
|Rent Accommodation|Value of rent-free accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer computed in prescribed manner [Section 17(2)(i)]. [Refer discussion on valuation of perquisite]| |
|Exception:|Rent-free official residence provided to a Judge of a High Court or to a Judge of the Supreme Court is not taxable if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).| |
|Concession in rent|Value of any accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer at a concessional rate.|Accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if the value of accommodation computed in the prescribed manner exceeds the rent recoverable from, or payable by, the assessee [Section 17(2)(ii)].|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Payment by the employer Amount paid by an employer in respect of any obligation which otherwise would have been payable by the employee [Section 17(2)(iv)].

Example: If a domestic servant is engaged by an employee and the employer reimburses the salary paid to the servant, it becomes an obligation which the employee would have discharged even if the employer did not reimburse the same. This perquisite will be covered by section 17(2)(iv) and will be taxable in the hands of all employees.

Amount payable by an employer directly or indirectly to effect an assurance on the life of the assessee or to effect a contract for an annuity, other than payment made to RPF or approved superannuation fund or deposit-linked insurance fund established under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 or Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 [Section 17(2)(v)].

However, there are schemes like group annuity scheme, employees state insurance scheme and fidelity insurance scheme, under which insurance premium is paid by employer on behalf of the employees. Such payments are not regarded as perquisite in view of the fact that the employees have only an expectancy of the benefit in such schemes.

Specified security or sweat equity shares The value of any specified security or sweat equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by employer or former employer, free of cost or at concessional rate to the assessee [Section 17(2)(vi)] [Refer discussion on valuation of perquisite].

Amount or the aggregate of amounts of any contribution made to the account of the assessee by employer

- in a recognised provident fund
- in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)
- in an approved superannuation fund

to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000 [Section 17(2)(vii)].
# 3.56 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Annual accretion to the balance at the credit of the recognised provident fund/NPS/approved superannuation fund which relates to the employer’s contribution and included in total income (on account of the same having exceeded ` 7,50,000)

Any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed by the CBDT [Section 17(2)(viii)].

Rule 3(7) prescribed the following other benefits or amenity taxable in case of all employees:

- Interest free or concessional loan
- Travelling, touring and accommodation
- Free or concessional food and non-alcoholic beverages
- Gift, voucher or token in lieu of such gift
- Credit card expense
- Club expenditure
- Use of movable assets
- Transfer of movable assets
- Other benefit or amenity [For valuation, refer discussion on valuation of perquisite]

Annual accretion to the balance at the credit of the recognised provident fund/NPS/approved superannuation fund which relates to the employer’s contribution and included in total income (on account of the same having exceeded ` 7,50,000)

Any annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during the previous year to the balance at the credit of the recognized provident fund or NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it relates to the employer’s contribution which is included in total income in any previous year under section 17(2)(vii) computed in prescribed manner [Section 17(2)(viia)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

In other words, interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature on the amount which is included in total income under section 17(2)(vii) would also be treated as a perquisite.

The CBDT has, vide Rule 3B, notified the following manner to compute the annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during the previous year-

TP = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R

Where,

|TP|Taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the current P.Y.|
|---|---|
|PC|Amount or aggregate of amounts of employer’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved superannuation fund during the P.Y.|
|PC1|Amount or aggregate of amounts of employer’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved superannuation fund for the previous year or years commencing on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2020 other than the current P.Y.|
|TP1|Aggregate of taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the previous year or years commencing on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2020 other than the current P.Y.|
|R|I/ Favg|
|I|Amount or aggregate of amounts of income accrued during the current P.Y. in recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved superannuation fund|
|Favg|(Amount or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved superannuation fund on first day of the current P.Y. + Amount or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved superannuation fund on last day of the current P.Y.)/2|

Where the amount or aggregate of amounts of TP1 and PC1 exceeds the amount or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of the specified fund or scheme on the first day of the current previous year, then, the amount in excess of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.58 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

amount or aggregate of amounts of the said balance shall be ignored for the purpose of computing the amount or aggregate of amounts of TP1 and PC1.

# ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. X is appointed as a CFO of ABC Ltd. in Mumbai from 1.9.2021. His basic salary is ` 6,00,000 p.m. He is paid 8% as D.A. He contributes 10% of his pay and D.A. towards his recognized provident fund and the company contributes the same amount. The accumulated balance in recognized provident fund as on 1.4.2022, 31.3.2023 and 31.3.2024 is ` 9,81,137, ` 27,43,048 and ` 46,48,555, respectively. Compute the perquisite value chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. X u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia) for the A.Y. 2023-24 and A.Y. 2024-25. Prior to 1.9.2021, he was a consultant, whose professional fees was taxable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia) for A.Y. 2023-24

1. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = ` 7,77,600, being employer’s contribution to recognized provident fund during the P.Y. 2022-23 – ` 7,50,000 = ` 27,600
2. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(viia) = Annual accretion on perquisite taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R = (27,600/2) x 0.111 + 0 = ` 1,532

|PC|ABC Ltd.’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund during P.Y. 2022-23 = ` 27,600|
|---|---|
|PC1|Nil since employer’s contribution is less than ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund in P.Y. 2021-22 and there is no employer’s contribution in P.Y. 2020-21.|
|TP1|Nil|
|R|I/Favg = 2,06,711/18,62,093 = 0.111|
|I|RPF balance as on 31.3.2023 – employee’s and employer’s contribution during the year – RPF balance as on 1.4.2022 = ` 2,06,711 (` 27,43,048 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 9,81,137)|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Favg Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 1st April, 2022 + Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 31st March, 2023)/2 = (` 9,81,137 + ` 27,43,048)/2 = ` 18,62,093

Note – Interest on the aggregate of following will also be chargeable to tax during A.Y. 2023-24 –

1. ` 2,03,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2021-22]
2. ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2022-23]
3. interest accrued on ` 2,03,600 being excess employee’s contribution of P.Y. 2021-22

# Computation of perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia) for A.Y. 2024-25

1. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = ` 7,77,600, being employer’s contribution to recognized provident fund during the P.Y. 2023-24 – ` 7,50,000 = ` 27,600
2. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(viia) = Annual accretion on perquisite taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R = (27,600/2) x 0.09479 + (27,600 + 1,532) x 0.09479 = ` 1,308 + ` 2,761 = ` 4,069

PC ABC Ltd.’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund during P.Y. 2023-24 = ` 27,600

PC1 Amount of employer’s contribution in excess of ` 7,50,000 to RPF in P.Y. 2020-21 and P.Y. 2021-22 = ` 27,600

TP1 Taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the P.Y. 2022-23 = ` 1,532

R I/Favg = 3,50,307/36,95,802 = 0.09479

I RPF balance as on 31.3.2024 – employee’s and employer’s contribution during the year – RPF balance as on 1.4.2023 = ` 3,50,307 (` 46,48,555 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 27,43,048)

Favg Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 1st April, 2023 + Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 31st March, 2024)/2 = (` 27,43,048 + ` 46,48,555)/2 = ` 36,95,802

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.60 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Note – Interest on the aggregate of following will also be chargeable to tax during A.Y. 2024-25 –

1. ` 2,03,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2021-22]
2. ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2022-23]
3. ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2023-24]
4. interest accrued on ` 2,03,600 being excess employee’s contribution of P.Y. 2021-22
5. interest accrued on ` 5,27,600 being excess employee’s contribution of P.Y. 2022-23

# Exemption in respect of payment from superannuation funds [Section 10(13)]

Any payment received by any employee from an approved superannuation fund shall be entirely excluded from his total income if the payment is made

- (a) on the death of a beneficiary;
- (b) to an employee in lieu or in commutation of an annuity on his retirement at or after a specified age or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement; or
- (c) by way of refund of contribution on the death of a beneficiary; or
- (d) by way of contribution to an employee on his leaving the service in connection with which the fund is established otherwise than by retirement at or after a specified age or his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement, to the extent the payment made does not exceed the contribution made prior to 1-4-1962 and the interest thereon.
- (e) by way of transfer to the account of the employee under a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, which is notified by the Central Government.

# Tax free perquisites in all cases

The following perquisites are exempt from tax in the hands of all employees.

|Telephone|Telephone provided by an employer to an employee at his residence|
|---|---|
|Transport Facility|Transport facility provided by an employer engaged in the business of carrying of passengers or goods to his employees either free of charge or at concessional rate;|

(C) The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

|Privilege passes and privilege ticket orders granted by Indian Railways to its employees;|3.61|
|---|---|
|Perquisites allowed outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for rendering services outside India;| |
|Employer’s contribution to staff group insurance scheme;| |
|Payment of annual premium by employer on personal accident policy effected by him on the life of the employee;| |
|Refreshment provided to all employees during working hours in office premises;| |
|Subsidized lunch provided to an employee during working hours at office or business premises provided the value of such meal is upto ` 50; This exemption is available only if the employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).| |
|Recreational facilities, including club facilities, extended to employees in general i.e., not restricted to a few select employees;| |
|Amount spent by the employer on training of employees or amount paid for refresher management course including expenses on boarding and lodging;| |
|Sum payable by an employer to a RPF or an approved superannuation fund or deposit-linked insurance fund established under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous provisions Act, 1948 or the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 upto the limit prescribed;| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.62 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Leave travel concession

Leave travel concession if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), subject to the conditions specified under section 10 (discussed below).

Note: Value of Leave travel concession provided to the High Court judge or the Supreme Court Judge and members of his family are completely exempt without any conditions if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Medical facilities

Medical facilities subject to certain prescribed limits [Refer proviso to section 17(2)];

# Rent-free official residence

Rent-free official residence provided to a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A);

# Conveyance facility

Conveyance facility provided to High Court Judges under section 22B of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and Supreme Court Judges under section 23A of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Exemption in respect of Leave travel concession [Section 10(5)]

(i) This clause exempts the leave travel concession (LTC) received by employees from their employers for proceeding to any place in India,

(a) either on leave or

(b) after retirement from service or

(c) after termination of his service.

Exemption under this section would be available only to employees exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not available under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.63

(ii) The benefit is available to individuals - citizens as well as non-citizens - in respect of travel concession or assistance for himself or herself and for his/her family- i.e., spouse and children of the individual and parents, brothers and sisters of the individual or any of them wholly or mainly dependent on the individual.

(iii) Limit of exemption- The exemption in all cases will be limited to the amount actually spent subject to such conditions as specified in Rule 2B regarding the ceiling on the number of journeys for the place of destination. Under Rule 2B, exemption will be available in respect of 2 journeys performed in a block of 4 calendar years commencing from the calendar year 1986. Where such travel concession or assistance is not availed by the individual during any block of 4 calendar years, one such unavailed LTC will be carried forward to the immediately succeeding block of 4 calendar years and will be eligible for exemption.

Example: An employee does not avail any LTC for the block 2018-21. He is allowed to carry forward maximum one unavailed LTC to be used in the succeeding block of 2022-25. Accordingly, if he avails LTC in April, 2023, the same will be treated as having availed in respect of the block 2018-2021. Therefore, he will be eligible for exemption in respect of that journey and two more journeys can be further availed in respect of the block of 2022-25.

(iv) Monetary limits - Where the journey is performed on or after the 1.10.1997, the amount exempted under section 10(5) in respect of the value of LTC shall be the amount actually incurred on such travel subject to the following conditions:

|S.No.|Journey performed by|Limit|
|---|---|---|
|1|Air|Amount not exceeding the air economy fare of the National Carrier by the shortest route to the place of destination.|
|2|Any other mode:| |
| |(i) Where rail service is available|Amount not exceeding the air-conditioned first class rail fare by the|

# 3.64 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

shortest route to the place of destination

(ii) Where rail service is not available

- (a) a recognised amount not exceeding the 1st class or public transport deluxe class fare, as the case may be, on such transport by the shortest route to the place of destination
- (b) no recognised amount equivalent to the air-conditioned first class rail fare, for the distance of the journey by the shortest route, as if the journey had been performed by rail

Note: The exemption referred to shall not be available to more than two surviving children of an individual after 1.10.1998. This restrictive sub-rule shall not apply in respect of children born before 1.10.1998 and also in case of multiple births after one child.

Exemption in respect of leave travel concession under section 10(5) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. D went on a holiday on 25.12.2023 to Delhi with his wife and three children (one son – age 5 years; twin daughters – age 3 years). They went by flight (economy class) and the total cost of tickets reimbursed by his employer was ` 60,000 (` 45,000 for adults and ` 15,000 for the three minor children). Compute the amount of LTC exempt if Mr. D exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

Since the son’s age is more than the twin daughters, Mr. D can avail exemption for all his three children. The restriction of two children is not applicable to multiple births after one child. The holiday being in India and the journey being performed by air (economy class), the entire reimbursement met by the employer is fully exempt in the hands of Mr. D, since he is exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.65

# ILLUSTRATION 12

In the above illustration 11, will there be any difference if among his three children the twins were 5 years old and the son 3 years old? Discuss.

# SOLUTION

Since the twins’ age is more than the son, Mr. D cannot avail for exemption for all his three children. LTC exemption can be availed in respect of only two children. Taxable LTC = 15,000 × 1 = ` 5,000.

LTC exempt would be only ` 55,000 (i.e. ` 60,000 – ` 5,000)

# Medical facilities [Proviso to section 17(2)]

The following medical facilities are exempt from tax:

1. Value of medical treatment in any hospital maintained by the employer:
The value of any medical treatment provided to an employee or any member of his family in any hospital maintained by the employer;
2. Reimbursement of expenditure actually incurred on medical treatment:
Any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the employee on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family

- in any hospital maintained by the Government/local authority/any other hospital approved by the Government for the purpose of medical treatment of its employees;
- in respect of the prescribed disease or ailments in any hospital approved by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner having regard to the prescribed guidelines.
- in respect of any illness relating to COVID-19 subject to conditions notified by the Central Government

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 90/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified that for claiming benefit of such exemption, the employee has to submit the following documents to the employer, –

1. the COVID-19 positive report of the employee or family member, or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.66 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

through investigations, in a hospital or an in-patient facility by a treating physician of a person so admitted;

1. all necessary documents of medical diagnosis or treatment of the employee or his family member for COVID-19 or illness related to COVID-19 suffered within 6 months from the date of being determined as COVID-19 positive; and
2. a certification in respect of all expenditure incurred on the treatment of COVID-19 or illness related to COVID-19 of the employee or of any member of his family.

Premium paid to effect an insurance on the health of employee: Any premium paid by an employer in relation to an employee to effect an insurance on the health of such employee. However, any such scheme should be approved by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) for the purposes of section 36(1)(ib).

Reimbursement of premium paid to effect an insurance on the health of employee or for the family of an employee: Any sum paid by the employer in respect of any premium paid by the employee to effect an insurance on his health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme approved by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) for the purposes of section 80D.

Amount paid towards expenditure incurred outside India on medical treatment: Any expenditure incurred by the employer or any sum paid by the employer on any expenditure actually incurred by the employee on the following:

1. medical treatment of the employee or any member of the family of such employee outside India;
2. travel and stay abroad of the employee or any member of the family of such employee for medical treatment;
3. travel and stay abroad of one attendant who accompanies the patient in connection with such treatment.

# Conditions:

1. The perquisite element in respect of expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad will be exempt only to the extent permitted by the RBI.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.67

The expenses in respect of traveling of the patient and the attendant will be exempt if the employee’s gross total income as computed before including the said expenditure does not exceed ` 2 lakh.

Note: For this purpose, family means spouse and children of the individual. Children may be dependent or independent, married or unmarried. It also includes parents, brothers and sisters of the individual if they are wholly or mainly dependent upon him. Hospital includes a dispensary or a clinic or a nursing home.

# ILLUSTRATION 13

Compute the taxable value of the perquisite in respect of medical facilities received by Mr. G from his employer during the P.Y. 2023-24:

|Medical premium paid for insuring health of Mr. G|` 7,000|
|---|---|
|Treatment of Mr. G by his family doctor|` 5,000|
|Treatment of Mrs. G in a Government hospital|` 25,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s grandfather in a private clinic|` 12,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s mother (68 years and dependant) by family doctor|` 8,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s sister (dependant) in a nursing home|` 3,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s brother (independent)|` 6,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s father (75 years and dependent) abroad|` 50,000|
|Expenses of staying abroad of the patient|` 30,000|
|Limit specified by RBI|` 75,000|

# SOLUTION

Computation of taxable value of perquisite in the hands of Mr. G

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Treatment of Mrs. G in a Government hospital|-| |
|Treatment of Mr. G’s father (75 years and dependent) abroad|50,000| |
|Expenses of staying abroad of the patient and attendant|30,000| |
| | |80,000|
|Less: Exempt up to limit specified by RBI|75,000|5,000|
|Medical premium paid for insuring health of Mr. G|-| |

# 3.68 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Treatment of Mr. G by his family doctor|5,000|
|---|---|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s mother (dependent) by family doctor|8,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s sister (dependent) in a nursing home|3,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s grandfather in a private clinic|12,000|
|Treatment of Mr. G’s brother (independent)|6,000|
|Taxable value of perquisite|39,000|

Payment of premium on personal accident insurance policies

If an employer takes personal accident insurance policies on the life of employees and pays the insurance premium, no immediate benefit would become payable and benefit will accrue at a future date only if certain events take place. Moreover, the employers would be taking such policy in their business interest only, so as to indemnify themselves from payment of any compensation. Therefore, the premium so paid will not constitute a taxable perquisite in the employees’ hands‡.

# (C) Perquisites taxable only in the hands of specified employees [Section 17(2)(iii)]

Any monetary obligation of the employee which is discharged by the employer is perquisite in the hands of all employees as per section 17(2)(iv). However, sometimes instead of discharging employee’s obligation, employer provides perquisites in the form of facility to the employee. Such perquisites are taxable in the hands of specified employees only.

The value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided free of cost or at concessional rate which have not been included in (A) & (B) above will be taxable in the hands of specified employees. Followings are the example of such services:

1. Provision of sweeper, gardener, watchman or personal attendant
2. Facility of use of gas, electricity or water supplied by employer
3. Free or concessional tickets
4. Use of motor car
5. Free or concessional educational facilities

For valuation of such perquisites, refer discussion on valuation of perquisite.

‡CIT vs. Lala Shri Dhar [1972] 84 ITR 19 (Del.)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.69

# Meaning of specified employees:

1. Director employee: An employee of a company who is also a director is a specified employee. It is immaterial whether he is a full-time director or part-time director. It also does not matter whether he is a nominee of the management, workers, financial institutions or the Government. It is also not material whether or not he is a director throughout the previous year.
2. An employee who has substantial interest in the company: An employee of a company who has substantial interest in that company is a specified employee. A person has a substantial interest in a company if he is a beneficial owner of equity shares carrying 20% or more of the voting power in the company. Beneficial and legal ownership: In order to determine whether a person has a substantial interest in a company, it is the beneficial ownership of equity shares carrying 20% or more of the voting power that is relevant rather than the legal ownership.

Example: A, Karta of a HUF, is a registered shareholder of Bright Ltd. The amount for purchasing the shares is financed by the HUF. The dividend is also received by the HUF. Supposing further that A is an employee in Bright Ltd., the question arises whether he is a specified employee. In this case, he cannot be called a specified person since he has no beneficial interest in the shares registered in his name. It is only for the purpose of satisfying the statutory requirements that the shares are registered in the name of A. All the benefits arising from the shareholding goes to the HUF. Conversely, it may be noted that an employee who is not a registered shareholder will be considered as a specified employee if he has beneficial interest in 20% or more of the equity shares in the company.
3. Employee drawing in excess of ₹ 50,000: An employee other than an employee described in (i) & (ii) above, whose income chargeable under the head ‘salaries’ exceeds ₹ 50,000 is a specified employee. The above salary is to be considered exclusive of the value of all benefits or amenities not provided by way of monetary payments.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.70 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

In other words, for computing the limit of ` 50,000, the following items have to be excluded or deducted:

- (a) all non-monetary benefits;
- (b) monetary benefits which are exempt under section 10. This is because the exemptions provided under section 10 are excluded completely from salaries.
- (c) Standard deduction upto ` 50,000 [under section 16(ia)] is to be excluded irrespective of the regime.
- (d) Deduction for entertainment allowance [under section 16(ii)] and deduction toward professional tax [under section 16(iii)] are also to be excluded if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

If an employee is employed with more than one employer, the aggregate of the salary received from all employers is to be taken into account in determining the above ceiling limit of ` 50,000, i.e., Salary for this purpose = Basic Salary + Dearness Allowance + Commission, whether payable monthly or turnover based + Bonus + Fees + Any other taxable payment + Any taxable allowances + Any other monetary benefits – Deductions under section 16

# (2) Valuation of Perquisites

The Income-tax Rules, 1962 contain the provisions for valuation of perquisites. It is important to note that only those perquisites which the employee actually enjoys have to be valued and taxed in his hand.

Example: Suppose a company offers a housing accommodation rent-free to an employee but the latter declines to accept it, then the value of such accommodation obviously cannot be evaluated and taxed in the hands of the employees.

For the purpose of computing the income chargeable under the head “Salaries”, the value of perquisites provided by the employer directly or indirectly to the employee or to any member of his household by reason of his employment shall be determined in accordance with Rule 3.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.71

(A) Value of rent free accommodation/ Value of accommodation provided to employee at a concessional rate [Sub-rule (1) of Rule 3]§

Accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if the value of accommodation computed in the prescribed manner exceeds the rent recoverable from, or payable by, the assessee [Explanation to section 17(2)(ii)].

The value of residential accommodation provided by the employer during the previous year shall be determined in the following manner –

|Sl. No.|Circumstances|In case of unfurnished accommodation|In case of furnished accommodation|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Where the accommodation is provided by the Central Government or any State Government to the employees either holding office or post in connection with the affairs of the Union or of such State|• License fee determined by the Central Government or any State Government in respect of accommodation in accordance with the rules framed by such Government|• The value of perquisite as determined under column (3) should be increased by|
| | |• the rent actually paid by the employee.|(i) If furniture is owned by employer, 10% per annum of the cost of furniture (including television sets, radio sets, refrigerators, other household appliances, air-conditioning plant or equipment).|
| | | |(ii) If such furniture is hired from a third party, • The actual hire charges payable for the same as reduced by • any charges paid or payable for the same by the employee during the previous year|

§ Consequent to amendment of section 17(2)(i) and (ii), there has not been any amendment in Rule 3(1) upto 30.4.2023. As and when there is an amendment in Rule 3(1), the same will be given in the Statutory Update for May 2024/ Nov 2024 Examination.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.72 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

2. Where the (i) 15% of salary in cities having population > 25 lakhs as per 2001 census; (ii) 10% of salary in cities having population > 10 lakhs ≤ 25 lakhs as per 2001 census; (iii) 7.5% of salary in other areas, in respect of the period during which the accommodation occupied by the employee during the previous year as reduced by the rent, if any, actually paid by employee.

(a) where the accommodation is owned by the employer

- The value of perquisite as determined under column (3) should be increased by
- (i) If furniture is owned by employer, 10% per annum of the cost of furniture (including television sets, refrigerators, other household appliances, air-conditioning plant or equipment or other similar appliances or gadgets).
- (ii) If such furniture is hired from a third party, the actual hire charges payable for the same as reduced by any charges paid or payable for the same by the employee during the previous year.

(b) where the accommodation is taken on lease or rent by the employer

- Actual amount of lease rental paid or payable by the employer or 15% of salary whichever is lower, as reduced by the rent, if any, actually paid by the employee.
- The value of perquisite as determined under column (3) should be increased by
- (i) If furniture is owned by employer, 10% per annum of the cost of furniture (including television sets, radio sets, refrigerators, other household appliances, air-conditioning plant or equipment or other).
# SALARIES

3.73similar appliances or gadgets).(ii) If such furniture is hired from a third party,• the actual hire charges payable for the same as reduced by• any charges paid or payable for the same by the employee during the previous year3. Where the accommodation is provided by any employer, whether Government or any other employer, in a hotel.Not applicable• 24% of salary paid or payable for the previous year or• the actual charges paid or payable to such hotel, whichever is lower, for the period during which such accommodation is provided as reduced by• the rent, if any, actually paid or payable by the employee.However, where the employee is provided such accommodation for a period not exceeding in aggregate fifteen days on his transfer from one place to another, there would be no perquisite.
# Notes:

1. If an employee is provided with accommodation, on account of his transfer from one place to another, at the new place of posting while retaining the accommodation at the other place, the value of perquisite shall be determined with reference to only one such accommodation which has the lower perquisite value, as calculated above, for a period not exceeding 90 days.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.74 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

days and thereafter, the value of perquisite shall be charged for both such accommodations.

(2) Where the accommodation is provided by the Central Government or any State Government to an employee who is serving on deputation with any body or undertaking under the control of such Government,-

(i) the employer of such an employee shall be deemed to be that body or undertaking where the employee is serving on deputation; and

(ii) the value of perquisite of such an accommodation shall be the amount calculated in accordance with Sl. No.2.(a) of the above table, as if the accommodation is owned by the employer.

(3) “Accommodation” includes a house, flat, farm house or part thereof, or accommodation in a hotel, motel, service apartment, guest house, caravan, mobile home, ship or other floating structure.

(4) “Hotel” includes licensed accommodation in the nature of motel, service apartment or guest house.

# Meaning of Salary for Valuation Rules

“Salary” includes pay, allowances, bonus or commission payable monthly or otherwise or any monetary payment, by whatever name called, from one or more employers, as the case may be. However, it does not include the following, namely–

(1) dearness allowance or dearness pay unless it enters into the computation of superannuation or retirement benefits of the employee concerned;

(2) employer’s contribution to the provident fund account of the employee;

(3) allowances which are exempted from the payment of tax;

(4) value of the perquisites specified in section 17(2);

(5) any payment or expenditure specifically excluded under proviso to section 17(2);

(6) lump-sum payments received at the time of termination of service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, like gratuity, severance pay, leave encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits, commutation of pension and similar payments;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# ILLUSTRATION 14

Mr. C is a Finance Manager in ABC Ltd. The company has provided him with rent-free unfurnished accommodation in Mumbai. He gives you the following particulars:

|Basic salary|₹ 6,000 p.m.|
|---|---|
|Dearness Allowance|₹ 2,000 p.m. (30% is for retirement benefits)|
|Bonus|₹ 1,500 p.m.|

Even though the company allotted the house to him on 1.4.2023, he occupied the same only from 1.11.2023. Calculate the taxable value of the perquisite for A.Y.2024-25.

# SOLUTION

Value of the rent free unfurnished accommodation = 15% of salary for the relevant period

= 15% of [(` 6000 × 5) + (` 2,000 × 30% × 5) + (` 1,500 × 5)] [See Note below]

= 15% of ₹ 40,500 = ₹ 6,075.

Note: Since, Mr. C occupies the house only from 1.11.2023, we have to include the salary due to him only in respect of months during which he has occupied the accommodation. Hence salary for 5 months (i.e. from 1.11.2023 to 31.03.2024) will be considered.

# ILLUSTRATION 15

Using the data given in the previous illustration 14, compute the value of the perquisite if Mr. C is required to pay a rent of ₹ 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the use of this accommodation.

# SOLUTION

First of all, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a concessional rate. If the value of accommodation computed in prescribed manner exceeds the rent recoverable, or payable by, the assessee, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.

In this case, 15% of salary would be ₹ 6,075 (i.e. 15% of ₹ 40,500). The rent paid by the employee is ₹ 5,000 (i.e., ₹ 1,000 x 5). Since 15% of salary exceeds the rent recovered from the employee, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.76 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Value of the accommodation = ` 6,075

Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000

Perquisite value of accommodation given at a concessional rent = ` 1,075

# ILLUSTRATION 16

Using the data given in illustration 14, compute the value of the perquisite if ABC Ltd. has taken this accommodation on a lease rent of ` 1,200 p.m. and Mr. C is required to pay a rent of ` 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the use of this accommodation.

# SOLUTION

Here again, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a concessional rate.

In the case of accommodation taken on lease by the employer, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate if the rent paid by the employer or 15% of salary, whichever is lower, exceeds rent recoverable from the employee.

In this case, 15% of salary is ` 6,075 (i.e. 15% of ` 40,500). Rent paid by the employer is ` 6,000 (i.e. ` 1,200 x 5). The lower of the two is ` 6,000, which exceeds the rent paid by the employee i.e., ` 5,000 (` 1,000 x 5). Therefore, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.

Value of the accommodation [Note] = ` 6,000

Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000

Value of accommodation given at a concessional rent = ` 1,000

Note: Value of the accommodation is lower of

1. Lease rent paid by the company for relevant period = ` 1,200 × 5 = ` 6,000
2. 15% of salary for the relevant period (computed earlier) = ` 6,075

# ILLUSTRATION 17

Using the data given in illustration 14, compute the value of the perquisite if ABC Ltd. has provided a television (WDV ` 10,000; Cost ` 25,000) and two air conditioners. The rent paid by the company for the air conditioners is ` 400 p.m. each. The television was provided on 1.1.2024. However, Mr. C is required to pay a rent of ` 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the use of this furnished accommodation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.77

# SOLUTION

Here again, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a concessional rate. In the case of accommodation owned by the employer in a city having a population exceeding 25 lakh, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if 15% of salary exceeds rent recoverable from the employee. In case of furnished accommodation, the excess of hire charges paid or 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture, as the case may be, over and above the charges paid or payable by the employee has to be added to the value arrived at above to determine whether the accommodation is provided at a concessional rate.

In this case, 15% of salary is ₹ 6,075 (i.e. 15% of ₹ 40,500). The value of furniture of ₹ 4,625 (See Note below) is to be added to 15% of salary. The rent paid by the employee is ₹ 5,000 (i.e. ₹ 1,000 x 5). Therefore, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.

|Value of the accommodation (computed earlier)|₹ 6,075|
|---|---|
|Add: Value of furniture provided by the employer [Note]|₹ 4,625|
|Value of furnished accommodation|₹ 10,700|
|Less: Rent paid by the employee (₹ 1,000 × 5)|₹ 5,000|
|Value of furnished accommodation given at a concessional rent|₹ 5,700|

Note: Value of the furniture provided = (₹ 400 p.m. × 2 × 5 months) + (₹ 25,000 × 10% p.a. for 3 months) = ₹ 4,000 + ₹ 625 = ₹ 4,625

# ILLUSTRATION 18

Using the data given in illustration 17 above, compute the value of the perquisite if Mr. C is a government employee. The licence fees determined by the Government for this accommodation was ₹ 700 p.m.

# SOLUTION

In the case of Government employees, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if the licence fees determined by the employer as increased by the value of furniture and fixture exceeds the rent recovered/recoverable from the employee.

In this case, ₹ 3,500 (licence fees: ₹ 700 x 5) + ₹ 4,625 (Value of furniture) is the value of furnished accommodation. The rent paid by the employee is ₹ 5,000 (i.e. ₹ 1,000).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.78 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

x 5). Therefore, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.

|Value of the accommodation (` 700 × 5)|= ` 3,500|
|---|---|
|Add: Value of furniture provided by the employer (computed earlier)|= ` 4,625|
|Value of furnished accommodation|= ` 8,125|
|Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5)|= ` 5,000|
|Perquisite value of furnished accommodation given at concessional rent|= ` 3,125|

# (B) Motor Car [Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3]

If motor car is provided by the employer to the employee, it will be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only. However, the use of any vehicle provided by a company or an employer for journey by the assessee from his residence to his office or other place of work, or from such office or place to his residence shall not be regarded as a benefit given or provided to him free of cost or at concessional rate. [Explanation below section 17(2)(iii)]

But if the motor car is owned by the employee and used by him or members of his family wholly for personal purpose and for which employer reimburses the running and maintenance expenses of the car, it will be perquisite in the hands of all employees.

The value of perquisite by way of use of motor car to an employee by an employer shall be determined in the following manner –

|Sl. No.|Circumstances|Where cubic capacity of engine does not exceed 1.6 litres|Where cubic capacity of engine exceeds 1.6 litres|
|---|---|---|---|
|(1)|(2)|(3)|(4)|
|1|Where the motor car is owned or hired by the employer and –|Not a perquisite, provided the documents specified|Not a perquisite, provided the documents specified|

in Note (2) below the table

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

of his official in Note (2) below the are maintained by the employer.

(b) is used exclusively for expenditure incurred by the employer on the running and maintenance of motor car during the relevant previous year including remuneration, if any, paid by the employer to the chauffeur as increased by the amount representing normal wear and tear of the motor car and as reduced by any amount charged from the employee for such use.

(c) is used partly in the performance of duties and partly for private or personal purposes of his own or any member of his household and-

|(i) the expenses on maintenance and running are met or reimbursed by the employer|` 1,800 (plus ` 900, if chauffeur is also provided to run the motor car)|
|---|---|
|(ii) the expenses on running and maintenance for|` 600 (plus ` 900, if chauffeur is also provided by the employer)|

# INCOME TAX LAW

private or personal use are fully met by the assessee.

(2) Where the employee owns a motor car but the actual running and maintenance charges (including remuneration of the chauffeur, if any) are met or reimbursed to him by the employer and –

|(a) such reimbursement is for the use of the vehicle wholly and exclusively for official purposes|Not a perquisite, provided the documents specified in Note (2) below the table are maintained by the employer.|
|---|---|
|(b) such reimbursement is for the use of the vehicle partly for official purposes and partly for personal or private purposes of the employee or any member of his household.|The actual amount of expenditure incurred by the employer as reduced by the amount specified in Sl. No. (1)(c)(i) above (Also see note (2) below this table).|

(3) Where the employee owns any other automotive conveyance but the actual running and maintenance charges are met or
# SALARIES

|reimbursed to him by the employer|3.81|
|---|---|
|(a) such reimbursement is provided for the use of the vehicle wholly and exclusively for official purposes|Not a perquisite, Not applicable.|
|(b) such reimbursement is provided for the use of vehicle partly for official purposes and partly for personal or private purposes of the employee|The actual amount of expenditure incurred by the employer is reduced by the amount of ` 900. (Also see note (2) below the table)|

# Notes:

1. Where more than one motor car is provided - Where one or more motor-cars are owned or hired by the employer and the employee or any member of his household are allowed the use of such motor-car or all of any of such motor-cars (otherwise than wholly and exclusively in the performance of his duties), the value of perquisite shall be the amount calculated in respect of one car as if the employee had been provided one motor-car for use partly in the performance of his duties and partly for his private or personal purposes and the amount calculated in respect of the other car or cars as if he had been provided with such car or cars exclusively for his private or personal purposes.
2. Documents to be maintained in certain cases - Where the employer or the employee claims that the motor-car is used wholly and exclusively in the performance of official duty or that the actual expenses on the running and maintenance of the motor-car owned by the employee for official purposes is more than the amounts deductible in Sl. No. 2(b) or 3(b) of the above table, he may claim a higher amount attributable to such official use and the value of perquisite in such a case shall be the actual amount of charges met or reimbursed by the employer as reduced by such higher amount attributable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.82 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

to official use of the vehicle provided that the following conditions are fulfilled :-

1. the employer has maintained complete details of journey undertaken for official purpose which may include date of journey, destination, mileage, and the amount of expenditure incurred thereon;
2. the employer gives a certificate to the effect that the expenditure was incurred wholly and exclusively for the performance of official duties.

# (3) Meaning of Normal wear and tear of a motor-car

For computing the perquisite value of motor car, the normal wear and tear of a motor-car shall be taken at 10% per annum of the actual cost of the motor-car or cars.

# (C) Valuation of benefit of provision of domestic servants [Sub-rule (3) of Rule 3]

If servants are engaged by the employee and employer paid or reimbursed the employee for the wages of such servants, it will be perquisite in the hands of all employees. But if the domestic servants are engaged by the employer and facility of such servants is provided to the employee, it will be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only.

1. The value of benefit to the employee or any member of his household resulting from the provision by the employer of the services of a sweeper, a gardener, a watchman or a personal attendant, shall be the actual cost to the employer.
2. The actual cost in such a case shall be the total amount of salary paid or payable by the employer or any other person on his behalf for such services as reduced by any amount paid by the employee for such services.

# ILLUSTRATION 19

Mr. X and Mr. Y are working for M/s. Gama Ltd. As per salary fixation norms, the following perquisites were offered:

1. For Mr. X, who engaged a domestic servant for ` 500 per month, his employer reimbursed the entire salary paid to the domestic servant i.e. ` 500 per month.
2. For Mr. Y, he was provided with a domestic servant @ ` 500 per month as part of remuneration package.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.83

You are required to comment on the taxability of the above in the hands of Mr. X and Mr. Y, who are not specified employees.

# SOLUTION

In the case of Mr. X, it becomes an obligation which the employee would have discharged even if the employer did not reimburse the same. Hence, the perquisite will be covered under section 17(2)(iv) and will be taxable in the hands of Mr. X. This is taxable in the case of all employees.

In the case of Mr. Y, it cannot be considered as an obligation which the employee would meet. The employee might choose not to have a domestic servant. This is taxable only in the case of specified employees covered by section 17(2)(iii). Hence, there is no perquisite element in the hands of Mr. Y.

# (D) Valuation of gas, electricity or water supplied by employer [Sub-rule (4) of Rule 3]

If gas, electricity or water connections are taken by the employee and employer paid or reimbursed the employee for such expenses, it will be perquisite in the hands of all employees. But if the gas, electricity or water connections are taken in the name of employer and facility of such supplies are provided to the employee, it will be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only. The value of benefit to the employee resulting from the provision of gas, electricity or water supplied by the employer shall be determined as follow:

|Circumstances|Value of benefit|
|---|---|
|If payment is made to agency supplying of gas, electricity etc.|sum equal to the amount paid on that account by the employer to the agency supplying the gas, electric energy or water|
|If supply is made from resources owned by the employer|manufacturing cost per unit incurred by the employer|

Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such services, the amount so paid shall be deducted from the value so arrived at.

# (E) Valuation of free or concessional educational facilities [Sub-rule (5) of Rule 3]

If school fees of children of employee or any member of employee’s household is paid or reimbursed by the employer on employee’s behalf, it will be perquisite in the hands of all employees. But if the education facility is provided in the school maintained by the employer or in any school by reason of his being employment at free of cost or at

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.84 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

concessional rate, it would be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only. The value of benefit to the employee resulting from the provision of free or concessional educational facility for any member of his household shall be determined as follow:

|Circumstances|Value of benefit|
|---|---|
|If the educational institution is maintained and owned by the employer|cost of such education in a similar institution in or near the locality.|
|If free educational facilities are allowed in any other educational institution by reason of his being in employment of that employer|However, there would be no perquisite if the cost of such education or the value of such benefit per child does not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.|
|Others|amount of expenditure incurred by the employer in that behalf|

Where any amount is paid or recovered from the employee on that account, the value of benefit shall be reduced by the amount so paid or recovered.

Note: The exemption of ` 1,000 p.m is allowed only in case of education facility provided to the children of the employee and not in case of education facility provided to other household members.

# (F) Free or concessional tickets [Sub-rule (6) of Rule 3]

The value of any benefit or amenity resulting from the provision by an employer who is engaged in the carriage of passengers or goods, to any employee or to any member of his household for personal or private journey free of cost or at concessional fare, in any conveyance owned, leased or made available by any other arrangement by such employer for the purpose of transport of passengers or goods shall be taken to be the value at which such benefit or amenity is offered by such employer to the public as reduced by the amount, if any, paid by or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.

However, there would be no such perquisite to the employees of an airline or the railways.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.85

# (G) Valuation of other fringe benefits and amenities [Sub-rule (7) of Rule 3]

Section 17(2)(viii) provides that the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed would be included in the definition of perquisite and taxable in the hands of all employees. Accordingly, the following other fringe benefits or amenities are prescribed and the value thereof shall be determined in the manner provided hereunder:

# (i) Interest-free or concessional loan [Sub-rule 7(i) of Rule 3]

(a) The value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from the provision of interest-free or concessional loan for any purpose made available to

- the employee or
- any member of his household

during the relevant previous year by the employer or any person on his behalf shall be determined as the sum equal to the interest computed at the rate charged per annum by the State Bank of India, as on the 1st day of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same purpose advanced by it on the maximum outstanding monthly balance as reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any such member of his household.

“Maximum outstanding monthly balance” means the aggregate outstanding balance for each loan as on the last day of each month.

(b) However, no value would be charged if such loans are made available for medical treatment in respect of prescribed diseases (like cancer, tuberculosis, etc.) or where the amount of loans are not exceeding in the aggregate ₹ 20,000.

(c) Further, where the benefit relates to the loans made available for medical treatment referred to above, the exemption so provided shall not apply to so much of the loan as has been reimbursed to the employee under any medical insurance scheme.

# (ii) Travelling, touring and accommodation [Sub-rule 7(ii) of Rule 3]

(a) If Travelling, touring, accommodation etc. expenses are paid or reimbursed by employer - The value of travelling, touring, accommodation and any other expenses paid for or borne or reimbursed by the employer for any holiday availed of by the employee
# 3.86 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

or any member of his household, other than leave travel concession or assistance, shall be determined as the sum equal to the amount of the expenditure incurred by such employer in that behalf.

(b) If Travelling, touring, accommodation etc. facilities are maintained by employer to particular employees only - Where such facility is maintained by the employer, and is not available uniformly to all employees, the value of benefit shall be taken to be the value at which such facilities are offered by other agencies to the public.

(c) Expenses on any member of household accompanying such employee on office tour - Where the employee is on official tour and the expenses are incurred in respect of any member of his household accompanying him, the amount of expenditure so incurred shall also be a fringe benefit or amenity.

(d) If official tour is extended as vacation - However, where any official tour is extended as a vacation, the value of such fringe benefit shall be limited to the expenses incurred in relation to such extended period of stay or vacation. The amount so determined shall be reduced by the amount, if any, paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.

# (iii) Free or concessional food and non-alcoholic beverages [Sub-rule 7(iii) of Rule 3]

(a) The value of free food and non-alcoholic beverages provided by the employer to an employee shall be the amount of expenditure incurred by such employer. The amount so determined shall be reduced by the amount, if any, paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.

(b) However, the following would not be treated as a perquisite -

- (1) free food and non-alcoholic beverages provided by such employer
- • during working hours at office or business premises or
- • through paid vouchers which are not transferable and usable only at eating joints, to the extent the value thereof either case does not exceed fifty rupees per meal or
- (2) tea or snacks provided during working hours or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.87

(3) free food and non-alcoholic beverages during working hours provided in a remote area or an off-shore installation. Exemption in respect of free food and non-alcoholic beverage provided by such employer through paid voucher would not be available in case an employee pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# (iv) Value of gift, voucher or token in lieu of such gift [Sub-rule 7(iv) of Rule 3]

(a) The value of any gift, or voucher, or token in lieu of which such gift may be received by the employee or by member of his household on ceremonial occasions or otherwise from the employer shall be determined as the sum equal to the amount of such gift:

(b) However, if the value of such gift, voucher or token, as the case may be, is below ` 5,000 in the aggregate during the previous year, the value of perquisite shall be taken as ‘Nil’.

# (v) Credit card expenses [Sub-rule 7(v) of Rule 3]

(a) The amount of expenses including membership fees and annual fees incurred by the employee or any member of his household, which is charged to a credit card (including any add-on-card) provided by the employer, or otherwise, paid for or reimbursed by such employer shall be taken to be the value of perquisite chargeable to tax as reduced by the amount, if any paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.

(b) However, such expenses incurred wholly and exclusively for official purposes would not be treated as a perquisite if the following conditions are fulfilled.

1. complete details in respect of such expenditure are maintained by the employer which may, inter alia, include the date of expenditure and the nature of expenditure;
2. the employer gives a certificate for such expenditure to the effect that the same was incurred wholly and exclusively for the performance of official duties.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.88 INCOME TAX LAW

# (vi) Club expenditure [Sub-rule 7(vi) of Rule 3]

(a) The value of benefit to the employee resulting from the payment or reimbursement by the employer of any expenditure incurred (including the amount of annual or periodical fee) in a club by him or by a member of his household shall be determined to be the actual amount of expenditure incurred or reimbursed by such employer on that account. The amount so determined shall be reduced by the amount, if any, paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.

However, where the employer has obtained corporate membership of the club and the facility is enjoyed by the employee or any member of his household, the value of perquisite shall not include the initial fee paid for acquiring such corporate membership.

(b) Further, if such expenditure is incurred wholly and exclusively for business purposes, it would not be treated as a perquisite provided the following conditions are fulfilled:

1. complete details in respect of such expenditure are maintained by the employer which may, inter alia, include the date of expenditure, the nature of expenditure and its business expediency;
2. the employer gives a certificate for such expenditure to the effect that the same was incurred wholly and exclusively for the performance of official duties.

(c) There would be no perquisite for use of health club, sports and similar facilities provided uniformly to all employees by the employer.

# (vii) Use of moveable assets [Sub-rule 7(vii) of Rule 3]

Value of perquisite is determined as under:

|Asset given|Value of benefit|
|---|---|
|(a) Use of laptops and computers|Nil|
|(b) Movable assets, other than|10% p.a. of the actual cost of such asset, or the amount of rent or charge paid, or payable by the employer, as the case may be|
|(i) laptops and computers;| |
|(ii) assets already specified| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.89

Note: Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such asset, the amount so paid shall be deducted from the value of perquisite determined above.

# (viii) Transfer of moveable assets [Sub-rule 7(viii) of Rule 3]

Value of perquisite is determined as under:

|Assets transferred|Value of perquisite|
|---|---|
|Computers and electronic items|Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed @50% on WDV for each completed year of usage]|
|Motor cars|Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed @20% on WDV for each completed year of usage]|
|Any other asset|Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed @10% on SLM for each completed year of usage]|

Note: Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such asset, the amount so paid shall be deducted from the value of perquisite determined above.

# (ix) Other benefit or amenity [Sub-rule 7(ix) of Rule 3]

The value of any other benefit or amenity, service, right or privilege provided by the employer shall be determined on the basis of cost to the employer under an arms' length transaction as reduced by the employee's contribution, if any.

However, there will be no taxable perquisite in respect of expenses on telephones including mobile phone actually incurred on behalf of the employee by the employer i.e., if an employer pays or reimburses telephone bills or mobile phone charges of employee, there will be no taxable perquisite.

# ILLUSTRATION 20

Mr. X retired from the services of M/s Y Ltd. on 31.01.2024, after completing service of 30 years and one month. He had joined the company on 1.1.1994 at the age of 30 years and received the following on his retirement:

- Gratuity ` 6,00,000. He was covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.90 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Leave encashment of ` 3,30,000 for 330 days leave balance in his account. He was credited 30 days leave for each completed year of service.

(iii) As per the scheme of the company, he was offered a car which was purchased on 30.01.2021 by the company for ` 5,00,000. Company has recovered ` 2,00,000 from him for the car. Company depreciates the vehicles at the rate of 15% on Straight Line Method.

(iv) An amount of ` 3,00,000 as commutation of pension for 2/3 of his pension commutation.

(v) Company presented him a gift voucher worth ` 6,000 on his retirement.

(vi) His colleagues also gifted him a Television (LCD) worth ` 50,000 from their own contribution.

# Following are the other particulars:

(i) He has drawn a basic salary of ` 20,000 and 50% dearness allowance per month for the period from 01.04.2023 to 31.01.2024.

(ii) Received pension of ` 5,000 per month for the period 01.02.2024 to 31.03.2024 after commutation of pension.

Compute his gross total income from the above for Assessment Year 2024-25 assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

# Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. X for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic Salary = ` 20,000 x 10|2,00,000|
|Dearness Allowance = 50% of basic salary|1,00,000|
|Gift Voucher (See Note - 1)|6,000|
|Transfer of car (See Note - 2)|56,000|
|Gratuity (See Note - 3)|80,769|
|Leave encashment (See Note - 4)|1,30,000|
|Uncommuted pension (` 5000 x 2)|10,000|

# SALARIES

|Commuted pension (See Note - 5)|1,50,000|
|---|---|
|Gross Salary|7,32,769|
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|50,000|
|Taxable Salary /Gross Total Income|6,82,769|

# Notes:

(1) As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the employee or by member of his household not exceeding ` 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the amount was received on his retirement and the sum exceeds the limit of ` 5,000. Therefore, the entire amount of ` 6,000 is liable to tax as perquisite. An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 1,000 and gross total income would be ` 7,27,769.

(2) Perquisite value of transfer of car: As per Rule 3(7)(viii), the value of benefit to the employee, arising from the transfer of an asset, being a motor car, by the employer is the actual cost of the motor car to the employer as reduced by 20% of WDV of such motor car for each completed year during which such motor car was put to use by the employer. Therefore, the value of perquisite on transfer of motor car, in this case, would be:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Purchase price (30.1.2021)|5,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation @ 20%|1,00,000|
|WDV on 29.1.2022|4,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation @ 20%|80,000|
|WDV on 29.1.2023|3,20,000|
|Less: Depreciation @ 20%|64,000|
|WDV on 29.1.2024|2,56,000|
|Less: Amount recovered|2,00,000|
|Value of perquisite|56,000|

# 3.92 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

The rate of 15% as well as the straight line method adopted by the company for depreciation of vehicle is not relevant for calculation of perquisite value of car in the hands of Mr. X.

# (3) Taxable gratuity

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Gratuity received|6,00,000|
|Less : Exempt under section 10(10) - Least of the following:| |
|(i) Notified limit|` 20,00,000|
|(ii) Actual gratuity|` 6,00,000|
|(iii) 15/26 x last drawn salary x no. of completed years of services or part in excess of 6 months| |
|15/26 x ` 30,000 x 30|` 5,19,231|
|Taxable Gratuity|80,769|

Note: As per the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, D.A. is included in the meaning of salary. Since in this case, Mr. X is covered under payment of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, D.A. has to be included within the meaning of salary for computation of exemption under section 10(10).

# (4) Taxable leave encashment

| |Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|
|Leave Salary received| |3,30,000|
| |Less : Exempt under section 10(10AA) - Least of the following:| |
|(i) Notified limit| |` 25,00,000|
|(ii) Actual leave salary| |` 3,30,000|
|(iii) 10 months x ` 20,000| |` 2,00,000|
|(iv) Cash equivalent of leave to his credit| |` 2,20,000|
| |(330 × 20,000) (30)|` 2,00,000|
|Taxable Leave encashment| |1,30,000|

Note – It has been assumed that dearness allowance does not form part of salary for retirement benefits. In case it is assumed that dearness allowance forms part of pay for retirement benefits, then, the third limit for exemption under section 10(10AA) in respect of leave encashment would be ` 3,00,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.93 (i.e. 10 x ` 30,000) and the fourth limit ` 3,30,000, in which case, the taxable leave encashment would be ` 30,000 (` 3,30,000-` 3,00,000). In such a case, the gross total income would be ` 6,32,769.

# (5) Commuted Pension

Since Mr. X is a non-government employee in receipt of gratuity, exemption under section 10(10A) would be available to the extent of 1/3ʳᵈ of the amount of the pension which he would have received had he commuted the whole of the pension.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Amount received|3,00,000|
|Less: Exemption under section 10(10A) = × 3,00,000×|1  3|
| |3  2|
| |1,50,000|
|Taxable amount|1,50,000|

# (6) The taxability provisions under section 56(2)(x)

are not attracted in respect of television received from colleagues, since television is not included in the definition of property therein.

# ILLUSTRATION 21

Shri Bala employed in ABC Co. Ltd. as Finance Manager gives you the list of perquisites provided by the company to him for the entire financial year 2023-24:

1. Domestic servant was provided at the residence of Bala. Salary of domestic servant is ` 1,500 per month. The servant was engaged by him and the salary is reimbursed by the company (employer). In case the company has employed the domestic servant, what is the value of perquisite?
2. Free education was provided to his two children Arthy and Ashok in a school maintained and owned by the company. The cost of such education for Arthy is computed at ` 900 per month and for Ashok at ` 1,200 per month. No amount was recovered by the company for such education facility from Bala.
3. The employer has provided movable assets such as television, refrigerator and air-conditioner at the residence of Bala. The actual cost of such assets provided to the employee is ` 1,10,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) A gift voucher worth ` 10,000 was given on the occasion of his marriage anniversary. It is given by the company to all employees above certain grade.

(v) Telephone provided at the residence of Shri Bala and the bill aggregating to ` 25,000 paid by the employer.

(vi) Housing loan @ 6% per annum. Amount outstanding on 1.4.2023 is ` 6,00,000. Shri Bala pays ` 12,000 per month towards principal, on 5th of each month.

Compute the chargeable perquisite in the hands of Mr. Bala for the A.Y. 2024-25.

The lending rate of State Bank of India as on 1.4.2023 for housing loan may be taken as 10%.

# SOLUTION

# Taxability of perquisites provided by ABC Co. Ltd. to Shri Bala

(i) Domestic servant was employed by the employee and the salary of such domestic servant was paid/reimbursed by the employer. It is taxable as perquisite for all categories of employees.

Taxable perquisite value = ` 1,500 × 12 = ` 18,000.

If the company had employed the domestic servant and the facility of such servant is given to the employee, then the perquisite is taxable only in the case of specified employees. The value of the taxable perquisite in such a case also would be ` 18,000.

(ii) Where the educational institution is owned by the employer, the value of perquisite in respect of free education facility shall be determined with reference to the reasonable cost of such education in a similar institution in or near the locality. However, there would be no perquisite if the cost of such education per child does not exceed ` 1,000 per month.

Therefore, there would be no perquisite in respect of cost of free education provided to his child Arthy, since the cost does not exceed ` 1,000 per month. However, the cost of free education provided to his child Ashok would be taxable, since the cost exceeds ` 1,000 per month. The taxable perquisite value would be ` 14,400 (` 1,200 × 12).

Note – An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 1,000 per month is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 2,400.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(iii) Where the employer has provided movable assets to the employee or any member of his household, 10% per annum of the actual cost of such asset owned or the amount of hire charges incurred by the employer shall be the value of perquisite. However, this will not apply to laptops and computers. In this case, the movable assets are television, refrigerator and air conditioner and actual cost of such assets is ` 1,10,000. The perquisite value would be 10% of the actual cost i.e., ` 11,000, being 10% of ` 1,10,000.

(iv) The value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the employee or by member of his household not exceeding ` 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the amount was received on the occasion of marriage anniversary and the sum exceeds the limit of ` 5,000. Therefore, the entire amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite. Note - An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000.

(v) Telephone provided at the residence of the employee and payment of bill by the employer is a tax free perquisite.

(vi) The value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from the provision of interest-free or concessional loan made available to the employee or any member of his household during the relevant previous year by the employer or any person on his behalf shall be determined as the sum equal to the interest computed at the rate charged per annum by the State Bank of India (SBI) as on the 1ˢᵗ day of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same purpose advanced by it. This rate should be applied on the maximum outstanding monthly balance and the resulting amount should be reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him. “Maximum outstanding monthly balance” means the aggregate outstanding balance for loan as on the last day of each month. The perquisite value for computation is 10% - 6% = 4%.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.96 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Month|Maximum outstanding balance as on last date of month (`)|Perquisite value at 4% for the month (`)|
|---|---|---|
|April, 2023|5,88,000|1,960|
|May, 2023|5,76,000|1,920|
|June, 2023|5,64,000|1,880|
|July, 2023|5,52,000|1,840|
|August, 2023|5,40,000|1,800|
|September, 2023|5,28,000|1,760|
|October, 2023|5,16,000|1,720|
|November, 2023|5,04,000|1,680|
|December, 2023|4,92,000|1,640|
|January, 2024|4,80,000|1,600|
|February, 2024|4,68,000|1,560|
|March, 2024|4,56,000|1,520|

Total value of this perquisite: 20,880

Total value of taxable perquisite = ` 74,280 [i.e. ` 18,000 + ` 14,400 + ` 11,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 20,880].

Note - In case the alternate views are taken for items (ii) & (iv), the total value of taxable perquisite would be ` 57,280 [i.e., ` 18,000 + ` 2,400 + ` 11,000 + ` 5,000 + ` 20,880].

# (H) Valuation of specified security or sweat equity share for the purpose of section 17(2)(vi) [Sub-rule (8)]

The fair market value of any specified security or sweat equity share, being an equity share in a company, on the date on which the option is exercised by the employee, shall be determined in the following manner -

1. If shares are listed on recognized stock exchange - In a case where, on the date of the exercising of the option, the share in the company is listed on a recognized stock exchange, the fair market value shall be the average of the opening price and closing price of the share on that date on the said stock exchange.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.97

If shares are listed on more than one recognized stock exchange - Where, on the date of exercising of the option, the share is listed on more than one recognized stock exchanges, the fair market value shall be the average of opening price and closing price of the share on the recognised stock exchange which records the highest volume of trading in the share.

If no trading in share on recognized stock exchange - Where on the date of exercising of the option, there is no trading in the share on any recognized stock exchange, the fair market value shall be -

1. (a) the closing price of the share on any recognised stock exchange on a date closest to the date of exercising of the option and immediately preceding such date; or
2. (b) the closing price of the share on a recognised stock exchange, which records the highest volume of trading in such share, if the closing price, as on the date closest to the date of exercising of the option and immediately preceding such date, is recorded on more than one recognized stock exchange.

“Closing price” of a share on a recognised stock exchange on a date shall be the price of the last settlement on such date on such stock exchange. However, where the stock exchange quotes both “buy” and “sell” prices, the closing price shall be the “sell” price of the last settlement.

“Opening price” of a share on a recognised stock exchange on a date shall be the price of the first settlement on such date on such stock exchange. However, where the stock exchange quotes both “buy” and “sell” prices, the opening price shall be the “sell” price of the first settlement.

(2) If shares are not listed on recognized stock exchange - In a case where, on the date of exercising of the option, the share in the company is not listed on a recognised stock exchange, the fair market value shall be such value of the share in the company as determined by a merchant banker on the specified date.

For this purpose, “specified date” means, —

1. (i) the date of exercising of the option; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.98 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) any date earlier than the date of the exercising of the option, not being a date which is more than 180 days earlier than the date of the exercising.

Note: Where any amount has been recovered from the employee, the same shall be deducted to arrive at the value of perquisites.

# ILLUSTRATION 22

AB Co. Ltd. allotted 1000 sweat equity shares to Sri Chand in June 2023. The shares were allotted at ` 200 per share as against the fair market value of ` 300 per share on the date of exercise of option by the allottee viz. Sri Chand. The fair market value was computed in accordance with the method prescribed under the Act.

1. What is the perquisite value of sweat equity shares allotted to Sri Chand?
2. In the case of subsequent sale of those shares by Sri Chand, what would be the cost of acquisition of those sweat equity shares?

# SOLUTION

1. As per section 17(2)(vi), the value of sweat equity shares chargeable to tax as perquisite shall be the fair market value of such shares on the date on which the option is exercised by the assessee as reduced by the amount actually paid by, or recovered from, the assessee in respect of such shares.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Fair market value of 1000 sweat equity shares @ ` 300 each|3,00,000|
|Less: Amount recovered from Sri Chand 1000 shares @ ` 200 each|2,00,000|
|Value of perquisite of sweat equity shares allotted to Sri Chand|1,00,000|

As per section 49(2AA), where capital gain arises from transfer of sweat equity shares, the cost of acquisition of such shares shall be the fair market value which has been taken into account for perquisite valuation under section 17(2)(vi). (The provisions of section 49 are discussed in Unit 4: Capital Gains of this chapter)

Therefore, in case of subsequent sale of sweat equity shares by Sri Chand, the cost of acquisition would be ` 3,00,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.99

# (I) Valuation of specified security, not being an equity share in a company for the purpose of section 17(2)(vi) [Sub-rule (9)]

The fair market value of any specified security, not being an equity share in a company, on the date on which the option is exercised by the employee, shall be such value as determined by a merchant banker on the specified date.

For this purpose, “specified date” means,—

1. the date of exercising of the option; or
2. any date earlier than the date of the exercising of the option, not being a date which is more than 180 days earlier than the date of the exercising.

Tax on perquisite of specified securities and sweat equity shares is required to be paid in the year of exercising of option. However, where such shares or securities are allotted by the current employer, being an eligible start-up**, the perquisite is taxable in the year

- after the expiry of 48 months from the end of the relevant assessment year
- in which sale of such security or share are made by the assessee
- in which the assessee ceases to be the employee of the employer,

whichever is earlier.

# Definitions for the purpose of perquisite rules -

The following definitions are relevant for applying the perquisite valuation rules -

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Member of household|shall include-|
| |(a) spouse(s),|
| |(b) children and their spouses,|
| |(c) parents, and|
| |(d) servants and dependants;|
|Salary|includes the pay, allowances, bonus or commission payable monthly or otherwise or any monetary payment, by whatever name called from one or more employers, as the case may be, but does not include the following, namely:-|

**Referred to in section 80-IAC, which will be dealt with in detail at the Final level

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.100 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(a) dearness allowance or dearness pay unless it enters into the computation of superannuation or retirement benefits of the employee concerned;

(b) employer’s contribution to the provident fund account of the employee;

(c) allowances which are exempted from payment of tax;

(d) the value of perquisites specified in clause (2) of section 17 of the Income-tax Act;

(e) any payment or expenditure specifically excluded under proviso to clause (2) of section 17;

(f) lump-sum payments received at the time of termination of service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, like gratuity, severance pay, leave encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits, commutation of pension and similar payments;

# ILLUSTRATION 23

X Ltd. provided the following perquisites to its employee Mr. Y for the P.Y. 2023-24 –

1. Accommodation taken on lease by X Ltd. for ` 15,000 p.m. ` 5,000 p.m. is recovered from the salary of Mr. Y.
2. Furniture, for which the hire charges paid by X Ltd. is ` 3,000 p.m. No amount is recovered from the employee in respect of the same.
3. A car of 1,200 cc which is owned by X Ltd. and given to Mr. Y to be used both for official and personal purposes. All running and maintenance expenses are fully met by the employer. He is also provided with a chauffeur.
4. A gift voucher of ` 10,000 on his birthday.

Compute the value of perquisites chargeable to tax for the A.Y.2024-25, assuming his salary for perquisite valuation to be ` 10 lakh.

# SOLUTION

Computation of the value of perquisites chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. Y for the A.Y.2024-25

| |Particulars| |Amount in `|
|---|---|---|---|
|Value of accommodation at concessional rate|Actual amount of lease rental paid by X Ltd.|1,80,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

|15% of salary i.e., 15% of ` 10,00,000|1,50,000|
|---|---|
|Lower of the above|1,50,000|
|Less: Rent paid by Mr. Y (` 5,000 × 12)|60,000|
| |90,000|
|Add: Hire charges paid by X Ltd. for furniture provided for the use of Mr. Y (` 3,000 × 12)|36,000|
| |1,26,000|
|(2) Perquisite value of Santro car owned by X Ltd. and provided to Mr. Y for his personal and official use [(` 1,800 + ` 900) × 12]|32,400|
|(3) Value of gift voucher*|10,000|
|Value of perquisites chargeable to tax|1,68,400|

* An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000.

# 1.4 DEDUCTIONS FROM SALARY

The income chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’ is computed after making the following deductions:

1. Standard deduction [Section 16(ia)]
2. Entertainment allowance [Section 16(ii)]
3. Professional tax [Section 16(iii)]

|Income under the head “Salaries”|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Salary/Bonus/Commission etc.|A| |
|Taxable Allowance|B| |
|Value of Taxable Perquisites|C| |
|Gross Salary (A+B+C)| |D|
|Less: Deductions under Section 16| | |
|Standard deduction of upto ` 50,000|xxx| |
|Entertainment Allowance to Government employee, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out|xxx| |

# 3.102 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

Professional Tax paid, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

Net taxable income from Salary (D-E) F

# 1.4.1 Standard Deduction

A standard deduction of ` 50,000 or the amount of salary, whichever is lower, is to be provided to the employees.

Standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 is available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# 1.4.2 Entertainment allowance

Entertainment allowance received is fully taxable and is first to be included in the salary and thereafter the following deduction is to be made from gross salary:

However, deduction in respect of entertainment allowance is available in case of Government employees only. The amount of deduction will be lower of:

1. One-fifth of his basic salary or
2. ` 5,000 or
3. Entertainment allowance received.

Amount actually spent by the employee towards entertainment out of the entertainment allowance received by him is not a relevant consideration at all.

Deduction in respect of entertainment allowance would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The deduction would not be available under the default tax regime i.e., under section 115BAC.

# 1.4.3 Professional tax on employment

Professional tax or taxes on employment levied by a State under Article 276 of the Constitution is allowed as deduction only when it is actually paid by the employee during the previous year. The total amount by way of professional tax payable in respect of any one person shall not exceed ` 2,500 per annum.
# SALARIES

amount paid during the previous year can be more than ` 2,500 as the employee may have paid the professional tax of an earlier year during the previous year.

- If professional tax is reimbursed or directly paid by the employer on behalf of the employee, the amount so paid is first included as salary income and then allowed as a deduction u/s 16.
- Deduction in respect of professional tax would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The deduction would not be available under the default tax regime i.e., under section 115BAC.

# ILLUSTRATION 24

Mr. Goyal receives the following emoluments during the previous year ending 31.03.2024.

|Basic pay|` 4,00,000|
|---|---|
|Dearness Allowance|` 1,50,000|
|Commission|` 1,00,000|
|Entertainment allowance|` 40,000|
|Medical expenses reimbursed|` 25,000|
|Professional tax paid|` 2,000 (` 1,000 was paid by his employer)|

Mr. Goyal contributes ` 5,000 towards recognized provident fund. He has no other income. Determine the income from salary for A.Y. 2024-25, if Mr. Goyal is a State Government employee.

# SOLUTION

Computation of salary of Mr. Goyal for the A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic Salary|4,00,000|
|Dearness Allowance|1,50,000|
|Commission|1,00,000|
|Entertainment Allowance received|40,000|
|Employee’s contribution to RPF [Note]|-|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.104 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Medical expenses reimbursed|25,000|
|---|---|
|Professional tax paid by the employer|1,000|
|Gross Salary|7,16,000|
|Less: Deductions under section 16(ia) - Standard deduction of upto|50,000|
|Income from Salary|6,66,000|

Note: Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction u/s 80C. However, such deduction shall not be available under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# Computation of salary of Mr. Goyal for the A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act)

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Basic Salary|4,00,000| |
|Dearness Allowance|1,50,000| |
|Commission|1,00,000| |
|Entertainment Allowance received|40,000| |
|Employee’s contribution to RPF [Note]|-| |
|Medical expenses reimbursed|25,000| |
|Professional tax paid by the employer|1,000| |
|Gross Salary|7,16,000| |
|Less: Deductions under section 16| | |
|under section 16(ia) - Standard deduction of upto|50,000| |
|under section 16(ii) - Entertainment allowance being lowest of :| | |
|(a) Allowance received|40,000| |
|(b) One fifth of basic salary [1/5 × ` 4,00,000]|80,000| |
|(c) Statutory amount|5,000|5,000|
|under section 16(iii) - Professional tax paid|2,000| |
|Income from Salary|6,59,000| |

Note: Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction u/s 80C.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 1.5 RELIEF UNDER SECTION 89

(1) On account of arrears of salary or advance salary: Where by reason of any portion of an assessee’s salary being paid in arrears or in advance or by reason of his having received in any one financial year, salary for more than twelve months or a payment of profit in lieu of salary under section 17(3), his income is assessed at a rate higher than that at which it would otherwise have been assessed, the Assessing Officer shall, on an application made to him in this behalf, grant such relief as prescribed. The procedure for computing the relief is given in Rule 21A.

(2) On account of family pension: Similar tax relief is extended to assessees who receive arrears of family pension as defined in the Explanation to clause (iia) of section 57. “Family pension” means a regular monthly amount payable by the employer to a person belonging to the family of an employee in the event of his death.

(3) No relief at the time of Voluntary retirement or termination of service: No relief shall be granted in respect of any amount received or receivable by an assessee on his voluntary retirement or termination of his service, in accordance with any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement or a scheme of voluntary separation (in the case of a public sector company), if exemption under section 10(10C) in respect of such compensation received on voluntary retirement or termination of his service or voluntary separation has been claimed by the assessee in respect of the same assessment year or any other assessment year.

# ILLUSTRATION 25

In the case of Mr. Hari, who turned 71 years on 28.3.2024, you are informed that the salary (computed) for the previous year 2023-24 is ` 10,20,000 and arrears of salary received is ` 3,45,000. Further, you are given the following details relating to the earlier years to which the arrears of salary received is attributable to:

|Previous year|Taxable Salary (`)|Arrears now received (`)|
|---|---|---|
|2010 – 2011|7,10,000|1,03,000|
|2011 – 2012|8,25,000|1,17,000|
|2012 – 2013|9,50,000|1,25,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.106 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Compute the relief available under section 89 and the tax payable for the A.Y. 2024-25. Assume that Mr. Hari exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Note: Rates of Taxes:

|Assessment Year|For resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the previous year|For other resident individuals|
|---|---|---|
|2011–12|<br/>Slabs|Rate|
|Upto ` 2,40,000|Nil| |
|` 2,40,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%| |
|` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000|20%| |
|Above ` 8,00,000|30%| |

|Slabs|Rate|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 1,60,000|Nil|
|` 1,60,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%|
|` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 8,00,000|30%|

2012–13

|Slabs|Rate|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 2,50,000|Nil|
|` 2,50,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%|
|` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 8,00,000|30%|

|Slabs|Rate|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 1,80,000|Nil|
|` 1,80,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%|
|` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 8,00,000|30%|

2013–14

|Slabs|Rate|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 2,50,000|Nil|
|` 2,50,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%|
|` 5,00,001 - ` 10,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 10,00,000|30%|

|Slabs|Rate|
|---|---|
|Upto ` 2,00,000|Nil|
|` 2,00,001 - ` 5,00,000|10%|
|` 5,00,001 - ` 10,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 10,00,000|30%|

Note – Education cess@2% and secondary and higher education cess@1% was attracted on the income-tax for all above preceding years.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of tax payable by Mr. Hari for the A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Incl. arrears of salary|Excl. arrears of salary|
|---|---|---|
|Current year salary (computed)|10,20,000|10,20,000|
|Add: Arrears of salary|3,45,000|-|
|Taxable Salary|13,65,000|10,20,000|
|Income-tax thereon|2,19,500|1,16,000|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|8,780|4,640|
|Total payable|2,28,280|1,20,640|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.107

# Computation of tax payable on arrears of salary if charged to tax in the respective AYs

|Particulars|A.Y. 2011-12|A.Y. 2012-13|A.Y. 2013-14|
|---|---|---|---|
|Incl. arrears (`)|7,10,000|8,25,000|9,50,000|
|Excl. arrears (`)|7,10,000|8,25,000|9,50,000|
|Add: Arrears of salary|1,03,000|1,17,000|1,25,000|
|Taxable salary|8,13,000|9,42,000|10,75,000|
|Tax on the above|97,900|1,34,600|1,47,500|
|Add: Cess@3%|2,937|4,038|4,425|
|Tax payable|1,00,837|1,38,638|1,51,925|

# Computation of relief under section 89

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|i Tax payable in A.Y.2024-25 on arrears:| |
|Tax on income including arrears|2,28,280|
|Less : Tax on income excluding arrears|1,20,640|
| |1,07,640|
|ii Tax payable in respective years on arrears :| |
|Tax on income including arrears (` 1,00,837 + ` 1,38,638 + ` 1,51,925)|3,91,400|
|Less: Tax on income excluding arrears (` 78,280 + ` 1,02,485 + ` 1,18,450)|2,99,215|
| |92,185|
|Relief under section 89 - difference between tax on arrears in A.Y. 2024-25 and tax on arrears in the respective years|15,455|

# Tax payable for A.Y.2024-25 after relief under section 89

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income-tax payable on total income including arrears of salary|2,28,280|
|Less : Relief under section 89 as computed above|15,455|
|Tax payable after claiming relief|2,12,825|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.108 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# LET US RECAPITULATE

# Basis of Charge [Section 15]

(i) Salary is chargeable to tax either on ‘due’ basis or on ‘receipt’ basis, whichever is earlier.

(ii) However, where any salary, paid in advance, is assessed in the year of payment, it cannot be subsequently brought to tax in the year in which it becomes due.

(iii) If the salary paid in arrears has already been assessed on due basis, the same cannot be taxed again when it is paid.

If an employee works with more than one employer, salaries received from all the employers would be clubbed and brought to charge for the relevant previous year.

# Taxability/Exemption of certain Allowances

|Section|Allowance|Exemption|
|---|---|---|
|10(13A)|House Rent Allowance|Least of the following is exempt: (a) HRA actually received (b) Rent paid less 10% of salary (c) 50% of salary, if accommodation is located in Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi or Chennai 40% of salary, if the accommodation is located in any other city. Note - Exemption would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).|
|10(14)(ii)|Children education allowance|₹ 100 per month per child upto maximum of two children Note - Exemption would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).|
| |Transport allowance for commuting between the place of residence and the place of duty|₹ 3,200 per month for an employee who is blind or deaf and dumb or orthopedically handicapped Note - Exemption in respect of transport allowance would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Hostel expenditure ` 300 per month per child up to a maximum of two children

Note - Exemption would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Exemption of Terminal Benefits

[Exemption would be available to an assessee irrespective of the tax regime under which he pays tax]

|Section|Component of salary|Category of employee|Particulars [Taxability / Exemption under section 10]|
|---|---|---|---|
|10(10)|Gratuity|Central Government employees/ Members of Civil Services/ local authority employees etc.|Fully exempt u/s 10(10)(i)|
|10(10)|Gratuity|Other employees|Least of the following is exempt :|
|(i) Gratuity actually received In case of employees covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972| | | |
|(ii) 15/26 x last drawn salary x number of completed years or part in excess of six months (iii) ` 20,00,000| | | |
|10(10)|Gratuity|In case of employees not covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972|(ii) 1/2 x average salary of last 10 months x number of completed years of service (fraction to be ignored). (iii) ` 20,00,000|
|10(10A)|Pension|Government & Non-Government employees|Fully taxable|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.110 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Commuted pension|Employees of|Fully exempt under section 10(10A)(i)|
|---|---|---|
|Central Government/|local authorities/|Statutory corporation/|
|members of|Civil services/|All-India services/|
|Defence Services|Other Employees|If the employee is in receipt of gratuity|
| |1/3 x (commuted pension received ÷ commutation %)|x 100|
| |If the employee is not in receipt of gratuity|1/2 x (commuted pension received ÷ commutation %)|
| |x 100| |

# 10(10AA) Leave Salary

|Received during service|Government|Fully taxable|
|---|---|---|
|& Non-Government|Received at the time of retirement, (whether on superannuation or otherwise)|Government|
|Fully exempt u/s 10(10AA)(i)|Least of the following is exempt:| |
|(i) ` 25,00,000|(ii) Leave salary actually received| |
|(iii) Cash equivalent of leave standing at the credit of the employee|[based on average salary of last 10 months] (maximum 30 days for every year of service)| |
|(iv) 10 months’ salary (based on average salary of last 10 months preceding retirement)| | |

# 10(10B) Retrenchment Compensation

Least of the following is exempt:
(i) Compensation actually received

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(ii) ₹ 5,00,000

(iii) 15 days average pay × Completed years of service and part thereof in excess of 6 months

# 10(10C) Voluntary Retirement Compensation

Least of the following is exempt:

(i) Compensation actually received

(ii) ₹ 5,00,000

(iii) 3 months’ salary x completed years of service

(iv) Last drawn salary x remaining months of services left

# Section 10(5) [Leave Travel Concession]

Exemption is available for 2 trips in a block of 4 calendar years. Exemption would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

|S. No.|Journey performed by|Exemption|
|---|---|---|
|1|Air|Amount not exceeding air economy fare by the shortest route.|
|2|Any other mode:| |
| |(i) Where rail service is available|Amount not exceeding air-conditioned first-class rail fare by the shortest route to the place of destination|
| |(ii) Where rail service is not available| |
| |a) and public transport does not exist|Amount equivalent to air conditioned first class rail fares by the shortest route, as if the journey had been performed by rail|
| |b) but public transport exists.|Amount not exceeding the first class or deluxe class fare by the shortest route to the place of destination|

# Provident Funds - Exemption & Taxability provisions

|Particulars|Recognized PF|Unrecognized PF|Statutory PF|Public PF|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Employer’s Contribution in excess of 12%|Not taxable at the time|Fully exempt|N.A.|(as there is only)|

# 3.112 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

|Contribution|salary is taxable as contribution|assessee’s own contribution| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Employee’s Contribution|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|Not eligible for deduction|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|Eligible for deduction u/s 80C, where an employee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|
|Interest Credited on Employer’s Contribution|Amount in excess of 9.5% p.a. is taxable as “salary” u/s 17(1)|Not taxable at the time of credit of interest|Fully exempt|N.A.|
|Interest Credited on Employee’s Contribution|Amount in excess of 9.5% p.a. is taxable as “salary” u/s 17(1) [See Note below]|Not taxable at the time of credit of interest|Exempt upto certain limit of contribution|Fully exempt [See Note below]|
|Amount withdrawn on retirement/termination|Exempt from tax if (i) employee served a continuous period of 5 years or more; or (ii) retires before rendering 5 years of service because of ill health, contraction or discontinuance of employer’s business or reason beyond|Employer’s contribution and interest thereon is taxable as salary.|Employee’s contribution is not taxable.|Interest on employee’s contribution is taxable under income from other source.|

# SALARIES

the control of the employee; or

(iii) on cessation of employment, the employee obtains employment with any other employer, to the extent the accumulated balance in RPF is transferred to his RPF account maintained by the new employer.

(iv) The entire balance standing to the credit of the employee is transferred to his NPS account referred to in section 80CCD and notified by the Central Government.

In other cases, it will be taxable.

As per section 10(11), any payment from a Provident Fund (PF) to which Provident Fund Act, 1925, applies or from Public Provident Fund would be exempt.

Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participating in a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be exempt under section 10(12).

However, the exemption under section 10(11) or 10(12) would not be available in respect of income by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by that person/employee exceeding ` 2,50,000 in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2021.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.114 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

If the contribution by such person/employee is in a fund in which there is no employer’s contribution, then, a higher limit of ` 5,00,000 would be applicable for such contribution, and interest accrued in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1st April, 2021 would be exempt upto that limit.

It may be noted that interest accrued on contribution to such funds upto 31st March, 2021 would be exempt without any limit, even if the accrual of income is after that date.

# Valuation of Perquisites [Section 17(2) read with Rule 3]

# (I) Rent-free residential accommodation/ Accommodation provided to an employee at concessional rate

|S. No.|Category of Employee|Unfurnished accommodation|Furnished accommodation|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Government employee|License fee determined as per Government rules as reduced by the rent actually paid by the employee.|Add: 10% p.a. of the furniture cost. However, if the furniture is hired, then hire charges payable/paid should be added to the value determined under column (C), as reduced by charges recovered from employee.|
|2|Non-government employee|Where accommodation is owned by employer|Value determined under column (C) Add: 10% p.a. of the furniture cost. However, if the furniture is hired, then hire charges payable/paid should be added to the value.|

In cities having a population > 25 lacs as per 2001 census 15% of salary Perquisite value

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

In cities having a population > 10 lacs ≤ 25 lacs as per 2001 census

|10% of salary|determined under column (C),|as reduced by charges recovered from employee.|
|---|---|---|
|In other areas|7.5% of salary| |

The perquisite value should be arrived at by reducing the rent, if any, actually paid by the employee, from the above value.

Where the accommodation is taken on lease or rent by employer

Lower of the following is taxable:(a) actual amount of lease rent paid or payable by employer(b) 15% of salary
The lower of the above should be reduced by the rent, actually paid by the employee, to arrive at the perquisite value.

Add: 10% p.a. of the furniture cost.

However, if the furniture is hired, then hire charges payable/paid should be added to the value determined under column (C), as reduced by charges recovered from employee.

# (II) Interest free or concessional loan

In respect of any loan given by employer to employee or any member of his household (excluding for medical treatment for specified ailments or where loans amount in aggregate does not exceed ` 20,000), the interest at the rate charged by SBI as on the first day of the relevant previous year at maximum outstanding monthly balance (aggregate outstanding balance for each loan as on the last day of each month) as reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any member of his household.

# (III) Use of movable assets by employee/ any member of his household

|Asset given|Value of benefit|
|---|---|
|(a) Use of laptops and computers|Nil|
|(b) Movable assets, other than -|10% p.a. of the actual cost of such asset, or the amount of rent or charge paid, or payable by the employer, as the case may be|
|(i) laptops and computers; and| |
|(ii) assets already specified|Amount paid by/ recovered from an employee|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.116 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# (IV) Transfer of movable assets

Actual cost of asset to employer (-) cost of normal wear and tear (-) amount paid or recovered from employee

|Assets transferred|Value of perquisite|
|---|---|
|Computers and electronic items|@50% on WDV for each completed year of usage|
|Motor cars|@20% on WDV for each completed year of usage|
|Any other asset|@10% of actual cost of such asset to employer for each completed year of usage [on SLM basis]|

# (V) Motor car

|S. No.|Car|Expenses met by|Wholly official use|Partly personal use (c)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|Employer|Employer|Not a perquisite*|cc of engine|
| | | |upto 1.6 litres|₹ 1,800 p.m.|
| | | |above 1.6 litres|₹ 2,400 p.m.|
| | | |If chauffeur is also provided,|₹ 900 p.m. should be added to the above value.|
|2|Employee|Employer|Not a perquisite*|Actual amount of expenditure incurred by the employer as reduced by the perquisite value arrived at in (1) above.|
|3|Employer|Employee|-|cc of engine|
| | | |upto 1.6 litres|₹ 600 p.m.|
| | | |above 1.6 litres|₹ 900 p.m.|
| | | |If chauffeur is also provided,|₹ 900 p.m. should be added to the above value.|

* Provided employer maintains the complete details of such journey and expenditure thereon and gives a certificate that such expenditure are incurred wholly for official use.

Note: Where car is owned by employer and expenses are also met by the employer, the taxable perquisites in case such car is used wholly for personal purposes of the employee would be equal to the actual expenditure incurred by the employer on running and maintenance expenses and normal wear and tear (calculated @10% p.a. of actual cost of motor car) less amount charged from the employee for such use.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

# 3.117

# Meaning of Salary:

|S. No.|Calculation of exemption of Allowance/Terminal benefit/Valuation of perquisite|Meaning of salary|
|---|---|---|
|1|Gratuity (in case of non-Government employees covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972)|Basic salary and dearness allowance.|
|2|a) Gratuity (in case of non-Government employee not covered by Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972) b) Leave Salary c) House Rent Allowance d) Recognized Provident Fund e) Voluntary Retirement Compensation|Basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in terms of employment, and commission calculated as a fixed percentage of turnover.|
|3|Rent free accommodation and Accommodation provided to an employee at a concessional rate|All pay, allowance, bonus or commission or any monetary payment by whatever name called but excludes- (1) Dearness allowance not forming part of computation of superannuation or retirement benefit (2) employer’s contribution to the provident fund account of the employee; (3) allowances which are exempted from the payment of tax; (4) value of the perquisites specified in section 17(2); (5) any payment or expenditure specifically excluded under the proviso to section 17(2) i.e., payment of medical insurance premium specified therein.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.118 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(6) lump-sum payments received at the time of termination of service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, like gratuity, leave encashment, voluntary retirement benefits, commutation of pension and similar payments.

# Deductions from gross salary [Section 16]

# (1) Standard deduction [Section 16(ia)]

Standard deduction of upto ` 50,000.

Note - Deduction would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# (2) Entertainment allowance (allowable only in the case of government employees) [Section 16(ii)]

Least of the following is allowed as deduction:

1. ` 5,000
2. 1/5ᵗʰ of basic salary
3. Actual entertainment allowance received

Note - Deduction would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (3) Professional tax [Section 16(iii)]

Any sum paid by the assessee on account of tax on employment is allowable as deduction.

In case professional tax is paid by employer on behalf of employee, the amount paid shall be included in gross salary as a perquisite and then deduction can be claimed.

Note - Deduction would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Relief when salary is paid in arrears or in advance [Section 89]

Step 1 Calculate tax payable of the previous year in which the arrears/advance salary is received by considering:

1. Total Income inclusive of additional salary
2. Total Income exclusive of additional salary

Step 2 Compute the difference the tax calculated in Step 1 and Step 2 [i.e., (a) – (b)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.119

# Step 3

Calculate the tax payable of every previous year to which the additional salary relates:

- (a) On total income including additional salary of that particular previous year
- (b) On total income excluding additional salary.

# Step 4

Calculate the difference between (a) and (b) in Step 3 for every previous year to which the additional salary relates and aggregate the same.

# Step 5

Relief under section 89(1) = Amount calculated in Step 2 – Amount calculated in Step 4

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.120 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Mohit is employed with XY Ltd. on a basic salary of ` 10,000 p.m. He is also entitled to dearness allowance @100% of basic salary, 50% of which is included in salary as per terms of employment. The company gives him house rent allowance of ` 6,000 p.m. which was increased to ` 7,000 p.m. with effect from 01.01.2024. He also got an increment of ` 1,000 p.m. in his basic salary with effect from 01.02.2024. Rent paid by him during the P.Y.2023-24 is as under:

- April and May, 2023 - Nil, as he stayed with his parents
- June to October, 2023 - ` 6,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Ghaziabad
- November, 2023 to March, 2024 - ` 8,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Delhi

Compute his gross salary for A.Y.2024-25, assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

2. Ms. Rakhi is an employee in a private company. She receives the following medical benefits from the company during the previous year 2023-24:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|1 Reimbursement of following medical expenses incurred by Ms. Rakhi| |
|(A) On treatment of her self-employed daughter in a private clinic|4,000|
|(B) On treatment of herself by family doctor|8,000|
|(C) On treatment of her mother-in-law dependent on her, in a nursing home|5,000|
|2 Payment of premium on Mediclaim Policy taken on her health|7,500|
|3 Medical Allowance|2,000 p.m.|
|4 Medical expenses reimbursed on her son's treatment in a government hospital|5,000|
|5 Expenses incurred by company on the treatment of her minor son abroad including stay expenses|1,05,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

Expenses in relation to foreign travel of Rakhi and her son for medical treatment

Note - Limit prescribed by RBI for expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad is USD 2,50,000 per financial year under liberalized remittance scheme.

Examine the taxability of the above benefits and allowances in the hands of Rakhi.

# 3.

Mr. X is employed with AB Ltd. on a monthly salary of ` 25,000 per month and an entertainment allowance and commission of ` 1,000 p.m. each. The company provides him with the following benefits:

- A company owned accommodation is provided to him in Delhi. Furniture costing ` 2,40,000 was provided on 1.8.2023.
- A personal loan of ` 5,00,000 on 1.7.2023 on which it charges interest @ 6.75% p.a. The entire loan is still outstanding (Assume SBI rate of interest on 1.4.2023 was 12.75% p.a.)
- His son is allowed to use a motor cycle belonging to the company. The company had purchased this motor cycle for ` 60,000 on 1.5.2020. The motor cycle was finally sold to him on 1.8.2023 for ` 30,000.
- Professional tax paid by Mr. X is ` 2,000.

Compute the income from salary of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2024-25 assuming Mr. X exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 4.

Mr. Balaji, employed as Production Manager in Beta Ltd., furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.03.2024:

- Basic salary upto 31.10.2023 ` 50,000 p.m.
- Basic salary from 01.11.2023 ` 60,000 p.m.
- Note - Salary is due and paid on the last day of every month.

Dearness allowance @ 40% of basic salary.
- Bonus equal to one month salary. Paid in October 2023 on basic salary plus dearness allowance applicable for that month.
- Contribution of employer to recognized provident fund account of the employee @ 16% of basic salary.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.122 INCOME TAX LAW

(v) Professional tax paid ` 2,500 of which ` 2,000 was paid by the employer.

(vi) Facility of laptop and computer was provided to Balaji for both official and personal use. Cost of laptop ` 45,000 and computer ` 35,000 were acquired by the company on 01.12.2023.

(vii) Motor car owned by the employer (cubic capacity of engine exceeds 1.60 litres) provided to the employee from 01.11.2023 meant for both official and personal use. Repair and running expenses of ` 45,000 from 01.11.2023 to 31.03.2024, were fully met by the employer. The motor car was self-driven by the employee.

(viii) Leave travel concession given to employee, his wife and three children (one daughter aged 7 and twin sons aged 3). Cost of air tickets (economy class) reimbursed by the employer ` 30,000 for adults and ` 45,000 for three children. Balaji is eligible for availing exemption this year to the extent it is permissible in law.

Compute the salary income chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. Balaji for the A.Y. 2024-25 assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 5.

From the following details, find out the salary chargeable to tax for the A.Y.2024-25 assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) -

Mr. X is a regular employee of Rama & Co., in Gurgaon. He was appointed on 1.1.2023 in the scale of ` 20,000 - ` 1,000 - ` 30,000. He is paid 10% D.A. & Bonus equivalent to one month pay based on salary of March every year. He contributes 15% of his pay and D.A. towards his recognized provident fund and the company contributes the same amount. DA forms part of pay for retirement benefits.

He is provided free housing facility which has been taken on rent by the company at ` 10,000 per month. He is also provided with following facilities:

- (i) Facility of laptop costing ` 50,000.
- (ii) Company reimbursed the medical treatment bill of his brother of ` 25,000, who is dependent on him.
- (iii) The monthly salary of ` 1,000 of a house keeper is reimbursed by the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

(iv) A gift voucher of ` 10,000 on the occasion of his marriage anniversary.

(v) Conveyance allowance of ` 1,000 per month is given by the company towards actual reimbursement of conveyance spent on official duty.

(vi) He is provided personal accident policy for which premium of ` 5,000 is paid by the company.

(vii) He is getting telephone allowance @` 500 per month.

# 6.

You are required to compute the income from salary of Mr. Raja under default tax regime from the following particulars for the year ended 31-03-2024:

(i) He retired on 31-12-2023 at the age of 60, after putting in 25 years and 9 months of service, from a private company at Delhi.

(ii) He was paid a salary of ` 25,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of ` 6,000 p.m. He paid rent of ` 6,500 p.m., during his tenure of service.

(iii) On retirement, he was paid a gratuity of ` 3,50,000. He was covered by the payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. He had not received any other gratuity at any point of time earlier, other than this gratuity.

(iv) He had accumulated leave of 15 days per annum during the period of his service; this was encashed by him at the time of his retirement. A sum of ` 3,15,000 was received by him in this regard. Employer allowed 30 days leave per annum.

(v) He is receiving ` 5,000 as pension. On 1.2.2024, he commuted 60% of his pension and received ` 3,00,000 as commuted pension.

(vi) The company presented him with a gift voucher of ` 5,000 on his retirement. His colleagues also gifted him a mobile phone worth ` 50,000 from their own contribution.

# 7.

Ms. Akansha, a salaried employee, furnishes the following details for the financial year 2023-24:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic salary|6,20,000|
|Dearness allowance|4,20,000|
|Commission|75,000|

# 3.124 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Entertainment allowance: 9,000

Medical expenses reimbursed by the employer: 18,000

Profession tax (of this, 50% paid by employer): 4,000

Health insurance premium paid by employer: 8,000

Gift voucher given by employer on her birthday: 10,000

Life insurance premium of Akansha paid by employer: 26,000

Laptop provided for use at home. Actual cost of Laptop to employer: 45,000

Children of the assessee are also using the Laptop at home.

Employer company owns a Maruti Suzuki Swift car, which was provided to the assessee, both for official and personal use. Driver was also provided. (Engine cubic capacity more than 1.6 litres). All expenses are met by the employer.

Annual credit card fees paid by employer [Credit card is not exclusively used for official purposes; details of usage are not available]: 7,000

You are required to compute the income chargeable under the head Salaries for the assessment year 2024-25 if she pays tax under default tax regime.

# ANSWERS

# 1. Computation of gross salary of Mr. Mohit for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic salary [(` 10,000 × 10) + (` 11,000 × 2)]|1,22,000|
|Dearness Allowance (100% of basic salary)|1,22,000|
|House Rent Allowance (See Note below)|21,300|
|Gross Salary|2,65,300|

# Note: Computation of Taxable House Rent Allowance (HRA)

|Particulars|April-May|June-Oct|Nov-Dec|Jan|Feb-March|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Basic salary per month|(` 10,000)|(` 10,000)|(` 10,000)|(` 10,000)|(` 11,000)|

# SALARIES

|Dearness allowance (included in salary as per terms of employment) (50% of basic salary)|5,000|5,000|5,000|5,000|5,500| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Salary per month for the purpose of computation of house rent allowance|15,000|15,000|15,000|15,000|16,500| | | | |
|Relevant period (in months)|2|5|2|1|2| | | | |
|Salary for the relevant period (Salary per month × relevant period)|30,000|75,000|30,000|15,000|33,000| | | | |
|Rent paid for the relevant period|Nil|30,000|16,000|8,000|16,000| | | | |
| | |(` 6,000×5)|(` 8,000×2)|(` 8,000×1)|(` 8,000×2)| | | | |
|House rent allowance (HRA) received during the relevant period (A)|12,000|30,000|12,000|7,000|14,000| | | | |
| |(` 6,000×2)|(` 6,000×5)|(` 6,000×2)|(` 7,000×1)|(` 7,000×2)| | | | |
|Least of the following is exempt [u/s 10(13A)]|N.A.|N.A.|N.A.|N.A.|N.A.| | | | |
|1. Actual HRA received|-|30,000|12,000|7,000|14,000| | | | |
|2. Rent paid (–) 10% of salary|-|22,500|13,000|6,500|12,700| | | | |
|3. 40% of salary (Residence at Ghaziabad – June to Oct, 2023)|-|30,000|15,000|7,500|16,500| | | | |
|50% of salary (Residence at Delhi– Nov, 23 - March, 24)| | | | | | | | | |
|Exempt HRA (B)|Nil|22,500|12,000|6,500|12,700| | | | |
|Taxable HRA [Actual HRA (–) Exempt HRA] (A-B)|12,000|7,500|Nil|500|1,300| | | | |
|Taxable HRA (total)|= ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300|= ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300|= ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300|= ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300|= ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300| | | | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.126 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 2. Tax treatment of medical benefits, allowances and mediclaim premium in the hands of Ms. Rakhi for A.Y. 2024-25

# Particulars

1. Reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by Ms. Rakhi
1. The amount of ` 4,000 reimbursed by her employer for treatment of her self-employed daughter in a private clinic is taxable perquisite.
2. The amount of ` 8,000 reimbursed by the employer for treatment of Ms. Rakhi by family doctor is taxable perquisite.
3. The amount of ` 5,000 reimbursed by her employer for treatment of her dependant mother-in-law in a nursing home is taxable perquisite.

The aggregate sum of ` 17,000, specified in (A), (B) and (C) above, reimbursed by the employer is taxable perquisite.
2. Medical insurance premium of ` 7,500 paid by the employer for insuring health of Ms. Rakhi is a tax free perquisite as per clause (iii) of the first proviso to section 17(2).
3. Medical allowance of ` 2,000 per month i.e., ` 24,000 p.a. is a fully taxable allowance.
4. As per clause (ii)(a) of the first proviso to section 17(2), reimbursement of medical expenses of ` 5,000 on her son’s treatment in a hospital maintained by the Government is a tax-free perquisite.
5. As per clause (vi) of the first proviso to section 17(2), the following expenditure incurred by the employer would be excluded from perquisite subject to certain conditions –
1. Expenditure on medical treatment of the employee, or any member of the family of such employee, outside India including stay expenses [` 1,05,000, in this case];
2. Expenditure on travel of the employee or any member of the family of such employee for medical treatment and one attendant who accompanies the patient in connection with such treatment [` 1,20,000, in this case].

The conditions subject to which the above expenditure would be exempt are as follows –
# SALARIES

3.127

(i) The expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad would be excluded from perquisite to the extent permitted by Reserve Bank of India;

(ii) The expenditure on travel would be excluded from perquisite only in the case of an employee whose gross total income, as computed before including the said expenditure, does not exceed ` 2 lakh.

Since the expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad does not exceed the limit permitted by RBI, they would be fully exempt. However, the foreign travel expenditure of Ms. Rakhi and her minor son borne by the employer would be excluded from perquisite only if the gross total income of Ms. Rakhi, as computed before including the said expenditure, does not exceed ` 2 lakh.

# 3. Computation of Income from Salary of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Basic salary [` 25,000 × 12]|3,00,000| |
|Commission [` 1,000 × 12]|12,000| |
|Entertainment allowance [` 1,000 × 12]|12,000| |
|Rent free accommodation [Note 1]|48,600| |
|Add : Value of furniture [` 2,40,000 × 10% p.a. for 8 months]|16,000|64,600|
|Interest on personal loan [Note 2]|22,500| |
|Use of motor cycle [` 60,000 × 10% p.a. for 4 months]|2,000| |
|Transfer of motor cycle [Note 3]|12,000| |
|Gross Salary| |4,25,100|
|Less : Deduction under section 16| | |
|Under section 16(ia) – Standard deduction|50,000| |
|Under section 16(iii) - Professional tax paid|2,000|52,000|
|Income from Salary| |3,73,100|

# Notes:

1. Value of rent-free unfurnished accommodation = 15% of salary for the relevant period = 15% of (` 3,00,000 + ` 12,000 + ` 12,000) = ` 48,600

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.128 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2. Value of perquisite for interest on personal loan

= [` 5,00,000 × (12.75% - 6.75%) for 9 months] = ` 22,500

# 3. Depreciated value of the motor cycle

= Original cost – Depreciation @ 10% p.a. for 3 completed years.

= ` 60,000 – (` 60,000 × 10% p.a. × 3 years) = ` 42,000.

Perquisite = ` 42,000 – ` 30,000 = ` 12,000.

# 4. Computation of Taxable Salary of Mr. Balaji for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic salary [(` 50,000 × 7) + (` 60,000 × 5)]|6,50,000|
|Dearness Allowance (40% of basic salary)|2,60,000|
|Bonus (` 50,000 + 40% of ` 50,000) (See Note 1)|70,000|
|Employers contribution to recognised provident fund in excess of 12% of salary = 4% of ` 6,50,000 (See Note 2)|26,000|
|Professional tax paid by employer|2,000|
|Perquisite of Motor Car (` 2,400 for 5 months) (See Note 4)|12,000|
|Gross Salary|10,20,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 16| |
|Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|` 50,000|
|Professional tax u/s 16(iii) (See Note 6)|` 2,500|
| |52,500|
|Taxable Salary|9,67,500|

# Notes:

1. Since bonus was paid in the month of October, the basic salary of ` 50,000 for the month of October is considered for its calculation.
2. It is assumed that dearness allowance does not form part of salary for computing retirement benefits.
3. As per Rule 3(7)(vii), facility of use of laptop and computer is a tax free perquisite, whether used for official or personal purpose or both.
4. As per the provisions of Rule 3(2), in case a motor car (engine cubic capacity exceeding 1.60 liters) owned by the employer is provided to the employee without chauffeur for personal as well as office use, the value of perquisite shall be ` 2,400 per month. The car was provided to
# SALARIES

the employee from 01.11.2023, therefore the perquisite value has been calculated for 5 months.

1. Mr. Balaji can avail exemption under section 10(5) on the entire amount of ₹ 75,000 reimbursed by the employer towards Leave Travel Concession since the same was availed for himself, his wife and three children and the journey was undertaken by economy class airfare. The restriction imposed for two children is not applicable in case of multiple births which take place after the first child.

It is assumed that the Leave Travel Concession was availed for journey within India.

He is eligible to claim benefit of exemption u/s 10(5) since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. As per section 17(2)(iv), a “perquisite” includes any sum paid by the employer in respect of any obligation which, but for such payment, would have been payable by the assessee. Therefore, professional tax of ₹ 2,000 paid by the employer is taxable as a perquisite in the hands of Mr. Balaji. As per section 16(iii), a deduction from the salary is provided on account of tax on employment i.e. professional tax paid during the year.

Therefore, in the present case, the professional tax paid by the employer on behalf of the employee ₹ 2,000 is first included in the salary and deduction of the entire professional tax of ₹ 2,500 is provided from salary.

# Computation of taxable salary of Mr. X for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Basic pay [(₹ 20,000×9) + (₹ 21,000×3)]|₹ 1,80,000 + ₹ 2,43,000|
| |₹ 63,000|
|Dearness allowance [10% of basic pay]|₹ 24,300|
|Bonus|₹ 21,000|
|Employer’s contribution to Recognized Provident Fund in excess of 12% (15%-12% =3% of ₹ 2,67,300) [See Note 1 below]|₹ 8,019|

# 3.130 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Taxable allowances

Telephone allowance
6,000
# Taxable perquisites

|Rent-free accommodation [See Note 1 & 2 below]|44,145|
|---|---|
|Medical reimbursement|25,000|
|Reimbursement of salary of housekeeper|12,000|
|Gift voucher [See Note 5 below]|10,000|
|Gross Salary|3,93,464|
|Less: Deduction under section 16(ia) – Standard deduction|50,000|
|Salary income chargeable to tax|3,43,464|

# Notes:

1. Since dearness allowance forms part of salary for retirement benefits, the perquisite value of rent-free accommodation and employer’s contribution to recognized provident fund have been accordingly worked out.
2. Where the accommodation is taken on lease or rent by the employer, the value of rent-free accommodation provided to employee would be actual amount of lease rental paid or payable by the employer or 15% of salary, whichever is lower. For the purposes of valuation of rent free house, salary includes:
1. Basic salary i.e., ` 2,43,000
2. Dearness allowance i.e. ` 24,300
3. Bonus i.e., ` 21,000
4. Telephone allowance i.e., ` 6,000

Therefore, salary works out to ` 2,43,000 + ` 24,300 + ` 21,000 + ` 6,000 = ` 2,94,300.
15% of salary = ` 2,94,300 × 15/100 = ` 44,145
Value of rent-free house = Lower of rent paid by the employer (i.e. ` 1,20,000) or 15% of salary (i.e., ` 44,145). Therefore, the perquisite value is ` 44,145.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3. Facility of use of laptop is not a taxable perquisite.

4. Conveyance allowance is exempt since it is based on actual reimbursement for official purposes.

5. The value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the employee or by member of his household below ` 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the gift voucher was received on the occasion of marriage anniversary and the sum exceeds the limit of ` 5,000. Therefore, the entire amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite. Note - An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000.

6. Premium of ` 5,000 paid by the company for personal accident policy is not liable to tax.

# Computation of income under the head “Salaries” of Mr. Raja for the A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Basic Salary = ` 25,000 x 9 months|2,25,000| |
|House Rent Allowance = ` 6,000 x 9 months|54,000|[Fully taxable under default tax regime]|
|Gratuity|3,50,000| |
|Less: Least of the following exempt under section 10(10)(ii)|3,50,000|Nil|
|(i) Actual Gratuity received ` 3,50,000| | |
|(ii) 15 days salary for every year of completed service [15/26 x ` 25,000 x 26] = ` 3,75,000| | |
|(iii) Notified limit = ` 20,00,000| | |
|Leave encashment|3,15,000| |
|Less: Least of the following exempt under section 10(10AA)|2,50,000|65,000|
|(i) ` 25,00,000| | |

# 3.132 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Leave salary actually received ₹ 3,15,000

(iii) ₹ 2,50,000, being 10 months’ salary x ₹ 25,000

(iv) Cash equivalent of leave standing at the credit of the employee based on the average salary of last 10 months’ (max. 30 days per year of service) for every year of actual service rendered for the employer from whose service he has retired

375/30 x ₹ 25,000 = ₹ 3,12,500

[Leave Due = Leave allowed – Leave taken]

= 750 (30 days per year × 25 years) – 375 days (15 days x 25) = 375 days]

Uncommuted Pension received [₹ 5,000 x 1 + ₹ 9,000 (₹ 5,000 x 2 x 40%)]

Commuted Pension received ₹ 3,00,000

Less: Exempt under section 10(10A)

1/3 x ₹ 3,00,000/60% x 100%) = ₹ 1,66,667 ₹ 1,33,333

Gift Voucher [As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the employee or by member of his household not exceeding ₹ 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year is exempt]

Mobile Phone received as gift from colleagues Nil

(Neither taxable under the head “Salaries” nor “Income from other sources”, since taxability provisions under section 56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of mobile phone received from colleagues, as mobile phone is not included in the definition of “property” thereunder)

Gross Salary ₹ 4,86,333

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# SALARIES

3.133

Less: Standard deduction u/s 16 [Actual salary or ` 50,000, whichever is less] [Allowable under default tax regime]

Net Salary 4,36,333

# 7. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Salaries” of Ms. Akansha for A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic Salary|6,20,000|
|Dearness allowance|4,20,000|
|Commission|75,000|
|Entertainment allowance|9,000|
|Medical expenses reimbursed by the employer is fully taxable|18,000|
|Professional tax paid by the employer is a taxable perquisite as per section 17(2)(iv), since it is an obligation of the employee which is paid by the employer|2,000|
|Health insurance premium of ` 8,000 paid by the employer is an exempt perquisite [Clause (iii) of proviso to section 17(2)]|Nil|
|Gift voucher given by employer on Ms. Akansha birthday (entire amount is taxable since the perquisite value exceeds ` 5,000) as per Rule 3(7)(iv)|10,000|
|Life insurance premium of Ms. Akansha paid by employer is a taxable perquisite as per section 17(2)(v)|26,000|
|Laptop provided for use at home is an exempt perquisite as per Rule 3(7)(vii)|Nil|
|Provision of motor car with driver (engine cubic capacity more than 1.6 litres) owned by employer to employee, the perquisite value would be ` 39,600 [` (2,400+ 900) ×12] as per Rule 3(2)|39,600|
|Annual credit card fees paid by employer is a taxable perquisite as per Rule 3(7)(v) since the credit card is not exclusively used for official purposes and details of usage are not available|7,000|
|Gross Salary|12,26,600|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.134 INCOME TAX LAW

# INCOME TAX LAW

Less: Deductions under section 16

|Standard Deduction as per section 16(ia)|50,000|
|---|---|
|Income chargeable under the head “Salaries”|11,76,600|

Note: As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any gift or voucher received by the employee or by member of his household on ceremonial occasions or otherwise from the employer shall be determined as the sum equal to the amount of such gift. However, the value of any gift or voucher received by the employee or by member of his household below ` 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year would be exempt as per the proviso to Rule 3(7)(iv).

In this case, the gift voucher of ` 10,000 was received by Ms. Akansha from her employer on the occasion of her birthday. Since the value of the gift voucher exceeds the limit of ` 5,000, the entire amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite. The above solution has been worked out accordingly.

An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable in view of the language of Circular No.15/2001 dated 12.12.2001, which states that such gifts upto ` 5,000 in the aggregate per annum would be exempt, beyond which it would be taxed as a perquisite. As per this view, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000. Accordingly, the gross salary and net salary would be ` 12,21,600 and ` 11,71,600, respectively.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# UNIT – 2: INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to-

- comprehend when income is chargeable under the head “Income from house property”;
- appreciate the meaning and tax treatment of composite rent;
- determine annual value of different categories of house property;
- compute income from house property for different categories of house property;
- comprehend and apply the tax treatment on recovery of unrealized rent and arrears of rent;
- compute income from co-owned property.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.136 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2.1 CHARGEABILITY [SECTION 22]

(i) The process of computation of income under the head “Income from house property” starts with the determination of annual value of the property. The concept of annual value and the method of determination is laid down in section 23.

(ii) The annual value of any property comprising of buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of which the assessee is the owner is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”.

Exceptions: Annual value of the following properties are chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” -

- (i) Portions of property occupied by the assessee for the purpose of any business or profession carried on by him
- (ii) Properties of an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of properties.

Annual value is the amount for which the property might reasonably be expected to let from year to year.

# 2.2 CONDITIONS FOR CHARGEABILITY

(i) Property should consist of any building or land appurtenant thereto.

- (a) Buildings include not only residential buildings, but also factory buildings, offices, shops, godowns and other commercial premises.
- (b) Land appurtenant means land connected with the building like garden, garage etc.

Income from letting out of vacant land is, however, taxable under the head “Income from other sources” or “Profits and gains from business or profession”, as the case may be.

(ii) Assessee must be the owner of the property

- (a) Owner is the person who is entitled to receive income from the property in his own right.
- (b) The requirement of registration of the sale deed is not warranted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

(c) Ownership includes both free-hold and lease-hold rights.

(d) Ownership includes deemed ownership (discussed later in point 2.11)

(e) The person who owns the building need not also be the owner of the land upon which it stands.

(f) The assessee must be the owner of the house property during the previous year. It is not material whether he is the owner in the assessment year.

(g) If the title of the ownership of the property is under dispute in a court of law, the decision as to who will be the owner chargeable to income-tax under section 22 will be of the Income-tax Department till the court gives its decision to the suit filed in respect of such property. In case of recovery of unrealized rent and arrears of rent, ownership of that property is not relevant. (discussed later in point 2.9)

# (iii) Use of property

The property may be used for any purpose i.e., commercial or residential purpose, but it should not be used by the owner for the purpose of any business or profession carried on by him, the profit of which is chargeable to tax. The income earned by an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of properties on rent would be taxable as business income1.

# (iv) Property held as stock-in-trade etc.

Annual value of house property will be charged under the head “Income from house property”, where it is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade of a business also. However, the annual value of property being held as stock in trade would be treated as NIL for a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority, if such property is not let-out during such period [Section 23(5)].

Where the assessee is a builder/construction company, the house property would be its stock-in-trade and rental income therefrom would be assessable under the head “Income from House

1Supreme Court ruling in Rayala Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Asstt. CIT (2016) 386 ITR 500
# 3.138 INCOME TAX LAW

Property. However, where the assessee is engaged in the business of letting out of properties, income therefrom would be assessable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# 2.3 COMPOSITE RENT

1. Meaning of composite rent: The owner of a property may sometimes receive rent in respect of building as well as –
1. other assets like say, furniture, plant and machinery.
2. for different services provided in the building, for e.g., –
1. Lifts;
2. Security;
3. Power backup;

The amount so received is known as “composite rent”.
2. Tax treatment of composite rent
Where composite rent includes rent of building and charges for different services (lifts, security etc.), the composite rent is has to be split up in the following manner-

1. the sum attributable to use of property is to be assessed under section 22 as income from house property;
2. the sum attributable to use of services is to be charged to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the head “Income from other sources”, as the case may be.
3. Manner of splitting up
If let out building and other assets are inseparable

Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other assets (like furniture) and the two lettings are not separable i.e. the other party does not accept letting out of building without other assets, then the rent is taxable either as business income or income from other sources, the case may be.

This is applicable even if sum receivable for the two lettings is fixed separately.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

If let out building and other assets are separable. Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other assets and the two lettings are separable i.e. letting out of one is acceptable to the other party without letting out of the other, then

1. income from letting out of building is taxable under “Income from house property”;
2. Income from letting out of other assets is taxable under “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”, as the case may be.

This is applicable even if a composite rent is received by the assessee from his tenant for the two lettings.

# 2.4 INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY SITUATED OUTSIDE INDIA

1. In case of a resident in India (resident and ordinarily resident in case of individuals and HUF), income from house property situated outside India is taxable, whether such income is brought into India or not.
2. In case of a non-resident or resident but not ordinarily resident in India, income from a property situated outside India is taxable only if it is received in India.

# 2.5 DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL VALUE [SECTION 23]

Determination Municipal tax paid by the owner during the previous year

|Determination of Gross Annual Value (GAV)|Net Annual Value (NAV)|
|---|---|
|(i) Determination of annual value for different types of house properties| |
|(1) Where the property is let out throughout the previous year [Section 23(1)(a)/(b)]| |
|Where the property is let out for the whole year, then the GAV would be the higher of –| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.140 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) Expected Rent (ER) and

(b) Actual rent received or receivable during the year

- The Expected Rent (ER) is the higher of fair rent (FR) and municipal value (MV), but restricted to standard rent (SR).
- For example, let us say the higher of FR and MV is X. Then ER = SR, if X>SR. However, if X<SR, ER = X.
- Expected Rent (ER) as per section 23(1)(a) cannot exceed standard rent (SR) but it can be lower than standard rent, in a case where standard rent is more than the higher of MV and FR.
- Municipal value is the value determined by the municipal authorities for levying municipal taxes on house property.
- Fair rent means rent which similar property in the same locality would fetch.
- The standard rent (SR) is fixed by the Rent Control Act.

From the GAV computed above, municipal taxes paid by the owner during the previous year are to be deducted to arrive at the NAV.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Jayashree owns five houses in India, all of which are let-out. Compute the GAV of each house from the information given below –

|Particulars|House I|House II|House III|House IV|House V|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Municipal Value|(` 80,000)|(` 55,000)|(` 65,000)|(` 24,000)|(` 80,000)|
|Fair Rent|(` 90,000)|(` 60,000)|(` 65,000)|(` 25,000)|(` 75,000)|
|Standard Rent|N.A.|(` 75,000)|(` 58,000)|N.A.|(` 78,000)|
|Actual rent received/receivable|(` 72,000)|(` 72,000)|(` 60,000)|(` 30,000)|(` 72,000)|

SOLUTION

As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and fair rent but restricted to standard rent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 3.141 Computation of GAV of each house owned by Jayashree

|Particulars|House I (`)|House II (`)|House III (`)|House IV (`)|House V (`)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(i) Municipal value|80,000|55,000|65,000|24,000|80,000|
|(ii) Fair rent|90,000|60,000|65,000|25,000|75,000|
|(iii) Higher of (i) & (ii)|90,000|60,000|65,000|25,000|80,000|
|(iv) Standard rent|N.A.|75,000|58,000|N.A.|78,000|
|(v) Expected rent [Lower of (iii) & (iv)]|90,000|60,000|58,000|25,000|78,000|
|(vi) Actual rent received/receivable|72,000|72,000|60,000|30,000|72,000|
|GAV [Higher of (v) & (vi)]|90,000|72,000|60,000|30,000|78,000|

# (2) Where let out property is vacant for part of the year [Section 23(1)(c)]

Where let out property is vacant for part of the year and owing to vacancy, the actual rent is lower than the ER, then the actual rent received or receivable will be the GAV of the property.

# (3) In case of self-occupied property or unoccupied property [Section 23(2)]

(a) Where the property is self-occupied for own residence or unoccupied throughout the previous year, its Annual Value will be Nil, provided no other benefit is derived by the owner from such property. The expression “Unoccupied property” refers to a property which cannot be occupied by the owner by reason of his employment, business or profession at a different place and he resides at such other place in a building not belonging to him.

(b) The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value is available only for up to two self-occupied or unoccupied house properties i.e., for either one house property or two house properties.

(c) The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of up to two self-occupied house properties is available only to an individual/HUF.

(d) No deduction for municipal taxes is allowed in respect of such.
# 3.142 INCOME TAX LAW

Property/properties as annual value means value determined after deduction of municipal taxes.

# (4) Where a house property is let-out for part of the year and self-occupied for part of the year [Section 23(3)]

- (a) If a single unit of a property is self-occupied for part of the year and let-out for the remaining part of the year, then the ER for the whole year shall be taken into account for determining the GAV.
- (b) The ER for the whole year shall be compared with the actual rent for the let out period and whichever is higher shall be adopted as the GAV.
- (c) However, municipal tax for the whole year is allowed as deduction provided it is paid by the owner during the previous year.

# (5) In case of deemed to be let out property [Section 23(4)]

- (a) Where the assessee owns more than two properties for self-occupation, then the income from any two properties, at the option of the assessee, shall be computed under the self-occupied property category and their annual value will be nil.
- (b) The other self-occupied/unoccupied properties shall be treated as “deemed let out properties”.
- (c) This option can be changed year after year in a manner beneficial to the assessee.
- (d) In case of deemed let-out property, the ER shall be taken as the GAV.
- (e) The question of considering actual rent received/receivable does not arise. Consequently, no adjustment is necessary on account of property remaining vacant or unrealized rent.
- (f) Municipal taxes actually paid by the owner during the previous year, in respect of the deemed let out properties, can be claimed as deduction.

# (6) In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade [Section 23(5)]

- (a) In some cases, property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto may be held as stock-in-trade, and the whole or any part of the property may not be let out during the whole or any part of the previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

(b) In such cases, the annual value of such property or part of the property shall be Nil.

(c) This benefit would be available for the period upto two years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority.

# (7) In case of a house property, a portion let out and a portion self -occupied

(a) Income from any portion or part of a property which is let out shall be computed separately under the “let out property” category and the other portion or part which is self -occupied shall be computed under the “self-occupied property” category.

(b) There is no need to treat the whole property as a single unit for computation of income from house property.

(c) Municipal valuation/fair rent/standard rent, if not given separately, shall be apportioned between the let-out portion and self-occupied portion either on plinth area or built-up floor space or on such other reasonable basis.

(d) Property taxes, if given on a consolidated basis, can be bifurcated as attributable to each portion or floor or on a reasonable basis.

The following are the circumstances where notional income is charged to tax instead of real income:

- Where the assessee owns more than two house properties for the purpose of self-occupation, the annual value of any two of those properties, at the option of the assessee, will be nil and the other properties are deemed to be let-out and income has to be computed on a notional basis by taking the Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV.
- In the case of property let-out throughout the previous year, if the Expected Rent (ER) exceeds the actual rent received or receivable, then ER is taken as the GAV.
- In the case of let-out property which is vacant for part of the year, if the actual rent received or receivable for let out period is less than the Expected Rent (ER) for whole year not owing to vacancy, then ER for whole year is taken as the GAV.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.144 INCOME TAX LAW

In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade by assessee (which is not let out), income has to be computed on a notional basis by taking the Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV after 2 years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority.

# (ii) Treatment of unrealised rent [Explanation below section 23(1)]

1. The Actual rent received/receivable should not include any amount of rent which is not capable of being realised.
2. However, the conditions prescribed in Rule 4 should be satisfied. They are –
1. the tenancy is bona fide;
2. the defaulting tenant has vacated, or steps have been taken to compel him to vacate the property;
3. the defaulting tenant is not in occupation of any other property of the assessee;
4. the assessee has taken all reasonable steps to institute legal proceedings for the recovery of the unpaid rent or satisfies the Assessing Officer that legal proceedings would be useless.

# (iii) Property taxes (Municipal taxes)

1. Property taxes are allowable as deduction from the GAV subject to the following two conditions:
1. It should be borne by the assessee (owner); and
2. It should be actually paid during the previous year.
2. If property taxes levied by a local authority for a particular previous year are not paid during that year, no deduction shall be allowed in the computation of income from house property for that year.
3. However, if in any subsequent year, the arrears are paid, then, the amount so paid is allowed as deduction in computation of income from house property for that year.
4. Thus, we find that irrespective of the previous year in which the liability to pay such taxes arises according to the method of
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

accounting regularly employed by the owner, the deduction in respect of such taxes will be allowed only in the year of actual payment by the owner.

(5) In case of property situated outside India, taxes levied by local authority of the country in which the property is situated is deductible².

(6) In respect of self-occupied/unoccupied house property/properties for which “Nil” Annual Value benefit is claimed, deduction of municipal taxes paid is not allowable.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Rajesh, a British national, is a resident and ordinarily resident in India during the P.Y.2023-24. He owns a house in London, which he has let out at £ 10,000 p.m. The municipal taxes paid to the Municipal Corporation of London is £ 8,000 during the P.Y.2023-24. The value of one £ in Indian rupee to be taken at ` 95. Compute Rajesh’s Net Annual Value of the property for the A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

For the P.Y.2023-24, Mr. Rajesh, a British national, is resident and ordinarily resident in India. Therefore, income received by him by way of rent of the house property located in London is to be included in the total income in India. Municipal taxes paid in London is be to allowed as deduction from the gross annual value.

# Computation of Net Annual Value of the property of Mr. Rajesh for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Gross Annual Value (£ 10,000 × 12 × 95)|1,14,00,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes paid (£ 8,000 × 95)|7,60,000|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|1,06,40,000|

²CIT v. R. Venugopala Reddiar (1965) 58 ITR 439 (Mad)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.146 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2.6 DEDUCTIONS FROM ANNUAL VALUE

# [SECTION 24]

(i) There are two deductions from annual value. They are –

1. 30% of NAV; and
2. Interest on borrowed capital

Deductions provided under section 24 are exhaustive.

(1) 30% of NAV is allowed as deduction under section 24(a)

- This is a flat deduction and is allowed irrespective of the actual expenditure incurred.
- The assessee will not be entitled to deduction of 30%, in the following cases, as the annual value itself is nil.

(2) Interest on borrowed capital is allowed as deduction u/s 24(b)

Interest payable on loans borrowed for the purpose of acquisition, construction, repairs, renewal or reconstruction can be claimed as deduction.

Interest payable on a fresh loan taken to repay the original loan raised earlier for the aforesaid purposes is also admissible as a deduction.

Interest for pre-construction period:

Pre-construction period is the period prior to the previous year in which property is acquired or construction is completed.

Interest payable on borrowed capital for the period prior to the previous year in which the property has been acquired or constructed (Pre-construction interest) as reduced by any part thereof allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act, can be claimed as deduction over a period of 5 years in equal annual installments commencing from the year of acquisition or completion of construction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

Interest for the year in which construction is completed / property is acquired:

Interest relating to the year of completion of construction / acquisition of property can be fully claimed in that year irrespective of the date of completion/ acquisition.

# (ii) Deduction in respect of self -occupied or unoccupied property where annual value is nil

# (1) Under default tax regime under section 115BAC

There would be no deduction on account of interest on loan under section 24(b) under default tax regime under section 115BAC in respect of the property referred to in section 23(2) i.e., self-occupied or unoccupied property.

# (2) Under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act)

(1) In case assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), the assessee will be allowed a deduction on account of interest (including 1/5ᵗʰ of the accumulated interest of pre-construction period) as under –

|Conditions|Amount of Deduction|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the property is acquired or constructed with capital borrowed on or after 1.4.1999 and such acquisition or construction certificate mentioned in (2) below is completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which the capital was borrowed.|Actual interest payable in aggregate for one or two self-occupied properties, subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000.|
|(ii) Where the property is repaired, renewed or reconstructed with capital borrowed on or after 1.4.1999.|Actual interest payable in aggregate for one or two self-occupied properties, subject to a maximum of ` 30,000.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.148 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Mr. Manas owns two house properties one at Bombay, wherein his family resides and the other at Delhi, which is unoccupied. He lives in Chandigarh for his employment purposes in a rented house. For acquisition of house property at Bombay, he has taken a loan of ` 30 lakh @ 10% p.a. on 1.4.2022. He has not repaid any amount so far. In respect of house property at Delhi, he has taken a loan of ` 5 lakh @ 11% p.a. on 1.10.2022 towards repairs. Compute the deduction which would be available to him under section 24(b) for A.Y.2024-25 in respect of interest payable on such loan if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

Mr. Manas can claim benefit of Nil Annual Value in respect of his house property at Bombay and Delhi, since no benefit is derived by him from such properties, and he cannot occupy such properties due to reason of his employment at Chandigarh, where he lives in a rented house.

He is eligible for deduction under section 24(b) since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Interest on loan taken for acquisition of residential house property at Bombay|30,00,000 x 10% = ` 3,00,000|
|Restricted to|2,00,000|
|Interest on loan taken for repair of residential house property at Delhi|` 5,00,000 x 11% = ` 55,000|
|Restricted to|30,000|
|Total interest|2,30,000|
|Deduction under section 24(b) in respect of (I) and (II) above to be restricted to|2,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

(2) Certificate to be furnished: For the purpose of claiming deduction of ` 2,00,000 as per (b)(i) in the table given above, the assessee should furnish a certificate from the person to whom any interest is payable on the capital borrowed, specifying the amount of interest payable by the assessee for the purpose of such acquisition or construction of the property or conversion of the whole or any part of the capital borrowed which remains to be repaid as a new loan.

- The ceiling limit would not apply to let-out/deemed let-out property: The ceiling limit prescribed for self-occupied property as above in respect of interest on loan borrowed does not apply to a let out/ deemed let-out property irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
- Interest allowable on accrual basis: Deduction under section 24(b) for interest is available on accrual basis. Therefore interest accrued but not paid during the year can also be claimed as deduction. In case of let out/ deemed let out property, interest accrued is allowable as deduction without ceiling limit under both the tax regimes. However, in case of default tax regime u/s 115BAC, the resultant loss from house property cannot be set off against income under any other head, whereas, under the normal provisions of the Act, the resultant loss from house property can be set off against income from any other head to the extent of ` 2 lakhs.
- Unpaid purchase price would be considered as capital borrowed: Where a buyer enters into an arrangement with a seller to pay the sale price in installments along with interest due thereon, the seller becomes the lender in relation to the unpaid purchase price and the buyer becomes the borrower. In such a case, unpaid purchase price can be treated as capital borrowed for acquiring property and interest paid thereon can be allowed as deduction under section 24.
- Interest on unpaid interest is not deductible.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.150 INCOME TAX LAW

# Deductions from Net Annual Value under default tax regime under section 115BAC

# Deductions allowed from NAV

|Let out/ deemed let out property|Self occupied property/ properties|
|---|---|
|Standard deduction u/s 24(a)|Interest on borrowed capital u/s 24(b)|
|30% of NAV|Fully Allowed|

# Deductions from Net Annual Value under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act)

# Deductions allowed from NAV

|Let out/ deemed let out property|Self occupied property/ properties|
|---|---|
|Standard deduction u/s 24(a)|Interest on borrowed capital u/s 24(b)|
|30% of NAV|where loan is taken for repair, renewal or reconstruction of house property|
|Fully Allowed|where loan is taken for acquisition or construction of house property|
|Maximum ` 30,000 in toto for one or two self occupied properties|Acquisition or construction completed within 5 years from the end of the FY in which the capital was borrowed|
| |Certificate from lender specifying interest payable|
|No|Yes|
|Maximum ` 30,000 in toto for one or two self occupied properties|Maximum ` 2,00,000 in toto for one or two self occupied properties|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 2.7 COMPUTATION OF “INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY” FOR DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF PROPERTY

# (I) PROPERTY LET OUT THROUGHOUT THE PREVIOUS YEAR

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER|ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR|
|Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable|Actual rent received/receivable less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [See Note below for alternate view]|
|Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|A|
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)|B|
|Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B)|C|
|Less: Deductions u/s 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV|D|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)|E|
|Income from house property (C-F)|G|

Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Anirudh has a property whose municipal valuation is ` 1,30,000 p.a. The fair rent is ` 1,10,000 p.a. and the standard rent fixed by the Rent Control Act is ` 1,20,000 p.a. The property was let out for a rent of ` 11,000 p.m. throughout the previous year. Unrealised rent was ` 11,000 and all conditions prescribed by Rule 4 are satisfied.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.152 INCOME TAX LAW

paid municipal taxes @10% of municipal valuation. Interest on borrowed capital was ` 40,000 for the year. Compute his income from house property for A.Y.2024-25.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of Income from house property of Mr. Anirudh for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER|ER = Higher of MV of ` 1,30,000 p.a. and FR of ` 1,20,000|
| |` 1,10,000 p.a., but restricted to SR of ` 1,20,000 p.a.|
|Step 2 Compute actual rent received/receivable|Actual rent received/receivable less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 = ` 1,32,000 - ` 11,000|
|Step 3 Compare ER of ` 1,20,000 and Actual rent received/receivable of ` 1,21,000| |
|Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and Actual rent received/receivable|1,21,000|
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|1,21,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) = 10% of ` 1,30,000|13,000|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|1,08,000|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV|32,400|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)|40,000|
| |72,400|
|Income from house property|35,600|

Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from GAV, then GAV would be ` 1,32,000, being higher of expected rent of ` 1,20,000 and actual rent of ` 1,32,000. Thereafter, unrealized rent of ` 11,000 and municipal taxes of ` 13,000 would be deducted from GAV of ` 1,32,000 to arrive at the NAV of ` 1,08,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# (II) LET OUT PROPERTY VACANT FOR PART OF THE YEAR

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER| |
|ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR| |
|Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Actual rent received/receivable for let out period less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [See Note below for alternate view]| |
|Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the let-out period| |
|Step 4 If Actual rent is lower than ER owing to vacancy, then Actual rent is the GAV.| |
|If Actual rent is lower than ER due to other reasons, then ER is the GAV.| |
|However, in spite of vacancy, if the actual rent is higher than the ER, then Actual rent is the GAV.| |
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|A|
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)|B|
|Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B)|C|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV|D|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)|E|
|Income from house property (C-F)|G|

Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Ganesh has a property whose municipal valuation is ` 2,50,000 p.a. The fair rent is ` 2,00,000 p.a. and the standard rent fixed by the Rent Control Act is ` 2,10,000 p.a. The property was let out for a rent of ` 20,000 p.m. However, the tenant vacated the property on 31.1.2024. Unrealised rent was ` 20,000 and all conditions prescribed by Rule 4 are satisfied. He paid municipal taxes @8% of municipal.
# 3.154 INCOME TAX LAW

valuation. Interest on borrowed capital was ` 65,000 for the year. Compute the income from house property of Ganesh for A.Y.2024-25.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of income from house property of Ganesh for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER|Higher of MV of ` 2,50,000 p.a. & FR of ` 2,00,000 p.a., but restricted to SR of ` 2,10,000 p.a.|
| |2,10,000|
|Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable|Actual rent received/receivable for let out period less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 = ` 2,00,000 – ` 20,000|
|Step 3 Compare ER & Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Step 4 In this case the actual rent of ` 1,80,000 is lower than ER of ` 2,10,000 owing to vacancy, since, had the property not been vacant the actual rent would have been ` 2,20,000 (` 1,80,000 + ` 40,000, being notional rent for February and March 20 23). Therefore, actual rent is the GAV.|1,80,000|
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|1,80,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) = 8% of ` 2,50,000|20,000|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|1,60,000|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 1,60,000|48,000|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)|65,000|
| |1,13,000|
|Income from house property|47,000|

Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from GAV, then GAV would be ` 2,00,000, being the actual rent, since the actual rent is lower than the expected rent of ` 2,10,000 owing to vacancy. Thereafter, unrealized rent of ` 20,000 and municipal taxes of ` 20,000 would be deducted from GAV of ` 2,00,000 to arrive at the NAV of ` 1,60,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# (III) SELF-OCCUPIED PROPERTIES OR UNOCCUPIED PROPERTIES

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Annual value under section 23(2)|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24| |
|Interest on borrowed capital [Allowable only in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]| |
|(i) Interest on loan taken for acquisition or construction of house on or after 1.4.99 and same was completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which capital was borrowed, interest paid or payable in toto for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-construction interest).| |
|(ii) Interest on loan taken for repair, renovation or reconstruction on or after 1.4.99, interest paid or payable in toto for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 30,000.| |
|Income from house property|-E|

However, aggregate interest on borrowed capital allowable under (i) and (ii) cannot exceed ` 2,00,000

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Poorna has one house property at Indira Nagar in Bangalore. She stays with her family in the house. The rent of similar property in the neighbourhood is ` 25,000 p.m. The municipal valuation is ` 2,80,000 p.a. Municipal taxes paid is ` 8,000. The house construction began in April 2017 with a loan of ` 20,00,000 taken from SBI Housing Finance Ltd. @9% p.a. on 1.4.2017. The construction was completed on 30.11.2019. The accumulated interest up to 31.3.2019 is ` 3,60,000. On 31.3.2024, Poorna paid ` 2,40,000 which included ` 1,80,000 as interest. There was no principal repayment prior to this date. Compute Poorna’s income from house property for A.Y. 2024-25 assuming that she has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.156 INCOME TAX LAW

# SOLUTION

# Computation of income from house property of Smt. Poorna for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Amount `|
|---|---|
|Annual Value of house used for self -occupation under section 23(2)|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24| |
|Interest on borrowed capital| |
|Interest on loan was taken for construction of house on or after 1.4.99 and same was completed within the prescribed time - interest paid or payable subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-construction interest) will be allowed as deduction.| |
|In this case the total interest is ` 1,80,000 + ` 72,000 (Being 1/5ᵗʰ of ` 3,60,000) = ` 2,52,000. However, the interest deduction is restricted to|2,00,000|
|Loss from house property|(2,00,000)|

# (IV) HOUSE PROPERTY LET-OUT FOR PART OF THE YEAR AND SELF OCCUPIED FOR PART OF THE YEAR

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER for the whole year|ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR|
|Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable|Actual rent received/receivable for the period let out less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [See Note below for alternate view]|
|Step 3 Compare ER for the whole year with the actual rent received/receivable for the let out period| |
|Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER computed for the whole year and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the let-out period| |
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|A|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

3.157

Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) B

Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B) C

Less: Deductions under section 24

- (a) 30% of NAV D
- (b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit) E F

Income from house property (C-F) G

Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Smt. Rajalakshmi owns a house property at Adyar in Chennai. The municipal value of the property is ` 5,00,000, fair rent is ` 4,20,000 and standard rent is ` 4,80,000. The property was let-out for ` 50,000 p.m. up to December 2023. Thereafter, the tenant vacated the property and Smt. Rajalakshmi used the house for self-occupation. Rent for the months of November and December 2023 could not be realised in spite of the owner’s efforts. All the conditions prescribed under Rule 4 are satisfied. She paid municipal taxes @12% during the year. She had paid interest of ` 25,000 during the year for amount borrowed for repairs for the house property. Compute her income from house property for the A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of income from house property of Smt. Rajalakshmi for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step 1 Compute ER for the whole year| |
|ER = Higher of MV of ` 5,00,000 and FR of ` 4,20,000, but restricted to SR of ` 4,80,000|4,80,000|
|Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Actual rent received/receivable for the period let out less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 = (` 50,000 × 9) - (` 50,000 × 2) = ` 4,50,000 - ` 1,00,000|3,50,000|

# 3.158 INCOME TAX LAW

Step 3 Compare ER for the whole year with the actual rent received/receivable for the let out period i.e. ` 4,80,000 and ` 3,50,000

Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER computed for the whole year and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the let-out period

|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|4,80,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) = 12% of ` 5,00,000|60,000|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|4,20,000|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 4,20,000|1,26,000|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital|25,000|
|Total Deductions|1,51,000|
|Income from house property|2,69,000|

Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from GAV then, GAV would be ` 4,80,000, being higher of expected rent of ` 4,80,000 and actual rent of ` 4,50,000. Thereafter, unrealized rent of ` 1,00,000 and municipal taxes of ` 60,000 would be deducted from GAV of ` 4,80,000 to arrive at the NAV of ` 3,20,000. The deduction u/s 24(a) would be ` 96,000, being 30% of ` 3,20,000. The income from house property would, therefore, be ` 1,99,000.

In this case, it may be noted that GAV is the higher of Expected rent and Actual rent, since the Actual rent is lower than the Expected rent due to self-occupation and not vacancy.

# (V) DEEMED TO BE LET OUT PROPERTY

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|A|
|ER is the GAV of house property| |
|ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR| |
|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)|B|
|Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B)|C|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV|D|

# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 3.159

(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without any ceiling limit)

Income from house property (C-F)

ILLUSTRATION 8

Ganesh has three houses, all of which are self-occupied. The particulars of the houses for the P.Y.2023-24 are as under:

|Particulars|House I|House II|House III|
|---|---|---|---|
|Municipal valuation p.a.|₹ 3,00,000|₹ 3,60,000|₹ 3,30,000|
|Fair rent p.a.|₹ 3,75,000|₹ 2,75,000|₹ 3,80,000|
|Standard rent p.a.|₹ 3,50,000|₹ 3,70,000|₹ 3,75,000|
|Date of completion/purchase|31.3.2000|31.3.2002|01.4.2016|
|Municipal taxes paid during the year|12%|8%|6%|
|Interest on money borrowed for repair of property during the current year|-|₹ 55,000| |
|Interest for current year on money borrowed in April, 2016 for purchase of property| | |₹ 1,75,000|

Compute Ganesh’s income from house property for A.Y.2024-25 and suggest which houses should be opted by Ganesh to be assessed as self-occupied so that his tax liability is minimum.

# SOLUTION

Let us first calculate the income from each house property assuming that they are deemed to be let out.

# Computation of income from house property of Ganesh for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Amount in ₹|House I|House II|House III|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|ER is the GAV of house property|3,50,000|3,60,000|3,75,000|
|ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR| | | | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.160 INCOME TAX LAW

|Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year)|36,000|28,800|19,800|
|---|---|---|---|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|3,14,000|3,31,200|3,55,200|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| | | |
|(a) 30% of NAV|94,200|99,360|1,06,560|
|(b) Interest on borrowed capital|-|55,000|1,75,000|
|Income from house property|2,19,800|1,76,840|73,640|

Ganesh can opt to treat any two of the above house properties as self-occupied.

# Under default tax regime under section 115BAC

# OPTION 1 (House I and II– self-occupied and House III – deemed to be let out)

If House I and II are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Self-occupied)|Nil|
|House II (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction)|Nil|
|House III (Deemed to be let -out)|73,640|
|Income from house property|73,640|

# OPTION 2 (House I and III – self-occupied and House II – deemed to be let out)

If House I and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Self-occupied)|Nil|
|House II (Deemed to be let -out)|1,76,840|
|House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction)|Nil|
|Income from house property|1,76,840|

# OPTION 3 (House II and III –self-occupied and House I – deemed to be let out)

If House II and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 3.161

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Deemed to be let-out)|2,19,800|
|House II (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction)|-|
|House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction)|-|
|Income from house property|2,19,800|

Since Option 1 is most beneficial, Ganesh should opt to treat House I and II as self-occupied and House III as deemed to be let out. His income from house property would be ` 73,640 for the A.Y. 2024-25 under default tax regime under section 115BAC.

If Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

# OPTION 1 (House I and II– self-occupied and House III – deemed to be let out)

If House I and II are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Self-occupied)|Nil|
|House II (Self-occupied) (Interest deduction restricted to ` 30,000)|(30,000)|
|House III (Deemed to be let-out)|73,640|
|Income from house property|43,640|

# OPTION 2 (House I and III – self-occupied and House II – deemed to be let out)

If House I and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Self-occupied)|Nil|
|House II (Deemed to be let-out)|1,76,840|
|House III (Self-occupied)|(1,75,000)|
|Income from house property|1,840|

# OPTION 3 (House II and III – self-occupied and House I – deemed to be let out)

If House II and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property shall be –
# 3.162 INCOME TAX LAW

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|House I (Deemed to be let-out)|2,19,800|
|House II (Self-occupied) (Interest deduction restricted to ` 30,000)|(30,000)|
|House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction)|(1,75,000)|
|(Total interest deduction restricted to ` 2,00,000)|(2,00,000)|
|Income from house property|19,800|

Since Option 2 is most beneficial in this case, Ganesh should opt to treat House I and III as self-occupied and House II as deemed to be let out. His income from house property would be ` 1,840 for the A.Y. 2024-25 under the optional tax regime i.e., the normal provisions of the Act.

# (VI) HOUSE PROPERTY, A PORTION LET OUT AND A PORTION SELF-OCCUPIED

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Prem owns a house in Madras. During the previous year 2023-24, 2/3ʳᵈ portion of the house was self-occupied and 1/3ʳᵈ portion was let out for residential purposes at a rent of ` 8,000 p.m. Municipal value of the property is ` 3,00,000 p.a., fair rent is ` 2,70,000 p.a. and standard rent is ` 3,30,000 p.a. He paid municipal taxes @10% of municipal value during the year. A loan of ` 25,00,000 was taken by him during the year 2019 for acquiring the property. Interest on loan paid during the previous year 2023-24 was ` 1,20,000. Compute Prem’s income from house property for the A.Y.2024-25 assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

What would be Prem’s income from house property under the default tax regime?

# SOLUTION

There are two units of the house. Unit I with 2/3 rd area is used by Prem for self-occupation throughout the year and no other benefit is derived from that unit, hence it will be treated as self-occupied and its annual value will be Nil. Unit 2 with 1/3ʳᵈ area is let-out throughout the previous year and its annual value has to be determined as per section 23(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 3.163

# Computation of income from house property of Mr. Prem for A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|Unit I (2/3ʳᵈ area – self-occupied)| |
|Annual Value|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24(b)| |
|2/3ʳᵈ of ` 1,20,000|80,000|
|Income from Unit I (self-occupied)|(80,000)|
|Unit II (1/3ʳᵈ area – let out)| |
|Computation of GAV| |
|Step I Compute ER| |
|ER = Higher of MV and FR, restricted to SR|1,00,000|
|However, in this case, SR of ` 1,10,000 (1/3ʳᵈ of ` 3,30,000) is more than the higher of MV of ` 1,00,000 (1/3ʳᵈ of ` 3,00,000) and FR of ` 90,000 (1/3ʳᵈ of ` 2,70,000). Hence the higher of MV and FR is the ER. In this case, it is the MV.| |
|Step 2 Compute actual rent received/ receivable|96,000|
|` 8,000×12 = ` 96,000| |
|Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable| |
|Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and actual rent received/receivable i.e. higher of ` 1,00,000 and ` 96,000| |
|Gross Annual Value(GAV)|1,00,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes paid by the owner during the previous year relating to let-out portion| |
|1/3ʳᵈ of (10% of ` 3,00,000) = ` 30,000/3 = ` 10,000|10,000|
|Net Annual Value(NAV)|90,000|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 90,000|27,000|
|(b) Interest paid on borrowed capital (relating to let out portion) 1/3ʳᵈ of ` 1,20,000|40,000|
| |67,000|
|Income from Unit II (let-out)|23,000|
|Loss under the head “Income from house property” = (` 80,000) + ` 23,000 = (` 57,000)| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.164 INCOME TAX LAW

Under the default tax regime, Prem would not be entitled to interest deduction of ` 80,000 under section 24(b) in respect of self-occupied portion (Unit 1). Hence, income from house property would be ` 23,000, being income from Unit II, which is let out.

# 2.8 INADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTION 25]

Interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside India shall not be deducted if –

- (a) tax has not been paid or deducted from such interest and
- (b) in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent³.

# 2.9 PROVISION FOR ARREARS OF RENT AND UNREALIZED RENT RECEIVED SUBSEQUENTLY [SECTION 25A]

(i) As per section 25A(1), the amount of rent received in arrears from a tenant or the amount of unrealised rent realised subsequently from a tenant by an assessee shall be deemed to be income from house property in the financial year in which such rent is received or realised, and shall be included in the total income of the assessee under the head “Income from house property”, whether the assessee is the owner of the property or not in that financial year.

(ii) Section 25A(2) provides a deduction of 30% of arrears of rent or unrealised rent realised subsequently by the assessee.

(iii) Summary:

|Section 25A|Arrears of Rent / Unrealised Rent|
|---|---|
|(i)|Taxable in the year of receipt/realisation|
|(ii)|Deduction@30% of rent received/realised|
|(iii)|Taxable even if assessee is not the owner of the property in the financial year of receipt/realisation.|

³under section 163

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. Anand sold his residential house property in March, 2023. In June, 2023, he recovered rent of ` 10,000 from Mr. Gaurav, to whom he had let out his house for two years from April 2017 to March 2019. He could not realise two months rent of ` 20,000 from him and to that extent his actual rent was reduced while computing income from house property for A.Y.2019-20.

Further, he had let out his property from April, 2019 to February, 2023 to Mr. Satish. In April, 2021, he had increased the rent from ` 12,000 to ` 15,000 per month and the same was a subject matter of dispute. In September, 2023, the matter was finally settled and Mr. Anand received ` 69,000 as arrears of rent for the period April 2021 to February, 2023.

Would the recovery of unrealised rent and arrears of rent be taxable in the hands of Mr. Anand, and if so in which year?

# SOLUTION

Since the unrealised rent was recovered in the P.Y.2023-24, the same would be taxable in the A.Y.2024-25 under section 25A, irrespective of the fact that Mr. Anand was not the owner of the house in that year. Further, the arrears of rent was also received in the P.Y.2023-24, and hence the same would be taxable in the A.Y.2024-25 under section 25A, even though Mr. Anand was not the owner of the house in that year. A deduction of 30% of unrealised rent recovered and arrears of rent would be allowed while computing income from house property of Mr. Anand for A.Y.2024-25.

# Computation of income from house property of Mr. Anand for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(i) Unrealised rent recovered|10,000|
|(ii) Arrears of rent received|69,000|
| |79,000|
|Less: Deduction@30%|23,700|
|Income from house property|55,300|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.166 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2.10 TREATMENT OF INCOME FROM CO-OWNED PROPERTY [SECTION 26]

1. Where property is owned by two or more persons, whose shares are definite and ascertainable, then the income from such property cannot be taxed as income of an AOP.
2. The share income of each such co-owner should be determined in accordance with sections 22 to 25 and included in his individual assessment.
3. Where the house property owned by co-owners is self occupied by each of the co-owners, the annual value of the property of each co-owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000 / ` 2,00,000, as the case may be, under section 24(b) on account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). However, the aggregate deduction of interest to each co-owner in respect of interest payable on loan taken for co-owned house property and interest, if any, payable on loan taken for another self-occupied property owned by him cannot exceed ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, as the case may be.
4. Where the house property owned by co-owners is let out, the income from such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.

# Summary:

|Co-owned property [Section 26]|Self-occupied property|Let-out property|
|---|---|---|
|The annual value of the property of each co-owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, as the case may be, on account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).|The income from such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.| |
|However, if the co-owner owns another self-occupied/unoccupied property, the aggregate interest from the co-owned property and the| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

other self-occupied property cannot exceed ` 30,000/` 2,00,000, as the case may be. As mentioned earlier, no interest deduction in respect of self-occupied property would be allowable to the co-owners under the default tax regime.

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Ms. Aparna co-owns a residential house property in Calcutta along with her sister Ms. Dimple, where her sister’s family resides. Both of them have equal share in the property and the same is used by them for self-occupation. Interest is payable in respect of loan of ` 50,00,000@10% taken on 1.4.2022 for acquisition of such property. In addition, Ms. Aparna owns a flat in Pune in which she and her parents reside. She has taken a loan of ` 3,00,000@12% on 1.10.2022 for repairs of this flat. Compute the deduction which would be available to Ms. Aparna and Ms. Dimple under section 24(b) for A.Y.2024-25, if both exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

# Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) available to Ms. Aparna for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|I Interest on loan taken for acquisition of residential house property at Calcutta| |
|` 50,00,000 x 10% = ` 5,00,000| |
|Ms. Aparna’s share = 50% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 2,50,000| |
|Restricted to ` 2,00,000|2,00,000|
|II Interest on loan taken for repair of flat at Pune| |
|` 3,00,000 x 12% = ` 36,000| |
|Restricted to ` 30,000|30,000|
|Total interest|2,30,000|
|Deduction under section 24(b) in respect of (I) and (II) above to be restricted to|2,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.168 INCOME TAX LAW

# Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) available to Ms. Dimple for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Interest on loan taken for acquisition of residential house property at Calcutta|₹ 50,00,000 x 10% = ₹ 5,00,000|
|Ms. Dimple’s share|50% of ₹ 5,00,000 = ₹ 2,50,000|
|Restricted to|₹ 2,00,000|
|Deduction under section 24(b)|₹ 2,00,000|

# 2.11 DEEMED OWNERSHIP [SECTION 27]

As per section 27, the following persons, though not legal owners of a property, are deemed to be the owners for the purposes of section 22 to 26.

1. Transfer to a spouse [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house property by an individual to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate consideration, the transferor is deemed to be the owner of the transferred property.

Exception – In case of transfer to spouse in connection with an agreement to live apart, the transferor will not be deemed to be the owner. The transferee will be the owner of the house property.
2. Transfer to a minor child [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house property by an individual to his or her minor child otherwise than for adequate consideration, the transferor would be deemed to be owner of the house property transferred.

Exception – In case of transfer to a minor married daughter, the transferor is not deemed to be the owner.

Note - Where cash is transferred to spouse/minor child and the transferee acquires property out of such cash, then, the transferor shall not be treated as deemed owner of the property. However, clubbing provisions will be attracted.
3. Holder of an impartible estate [Section 27(ii)] – The impartible estate is a property which is not legally divisible. The holder of an impartible estate shall be deemed to be the individual owner of all properties comprised in the estate.

After enactment of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, all the properties comprised in an impartible estate by custom is to be assessed in the status
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

of a HUF. However, section 27(ii) will continue to be applicable in relation to impartible estates by grant or covenant.

# (iv) Member of a co-operative society etc. [Section 27(iii)]

A member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons to whom a building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a House Building Scheme of a society/company/association, shall be deemed to be owner of that building or part thereof allotted to him although the co-operative society/company/association is the legal owner of that building.

# (v) Person in possession of a property [Section 27(iiia)]

A person who is allowed to take or retain the possession of any building or part thereof in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act shall be the deemed owner of that house property. This would include cases where the –

1. possession of property has been handed over to the buyer
2. sale consideration has been paid or promised to be paid to the seller by the buyer
3. sale deed has not been executed in favour of the buyer, although certain other documents like power of attorney/agreement to sell/will etc. have been executed.

In all the above cases, the buyer would be deemed to be the owner of the property although it is not registered in his name.

# (vi) Person having right in a property for a period not less than 12 years [Section 27(iiib)]

A person who acquires any rights in or with respect to any building or part thereof, by virtue of any transaction as is referred to in section 269UA(f) i.e. transfer by way of lease for not less than 12 years, shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof.

Exception – In case the person acquiring any rights by way of lease from month to month or for a period not exceeding one year, such person will not be deemed to be the owner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.170 INCOME TAX LAW

# LET US RECAPITULATE

|Section|Contents|
|---|---|
|22|Basis of Charge The annual value of any property comprising of buildings or lands appurtenant thereto, of which the assessee is the owner, is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”. (i) Property should consist of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto. Income from letting out of vacant land is, however, taxable under the head “Income from other sources” or “Profits and gains from business or profession”, as the case may be. (ii) Assessee must be the owner of the property. (iii) The property may be used for any purpose, but it should not be used by the owner for the purpose of any business or profession carried on by him, the profit of which is chargeable to tax. Further, the income earned by an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of properties on rent would be taxable as business income. (iv) Property held as stock-in-trade etc. Annual value of house property will be charged under the head “Income from house property”, where it is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade of a business also.|
|23(1)|Annual Value of let-out property Annual value is the amount arrived after deducting the municipal taxes actually paid by the owner during the previous year from the Gross Annual Value (GAV). The GAV of let-out property would be determined in the following manner:|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

3.171

# Step 1:

Compare fair rent with municipal value whichever is higher

# Step 2:

Compare step 1 value with standard rent whichever is lower is the Expected Rent

# Step 3

Compare the Expected rent determined above with actual rent

|Actual rent >|Actual rent <|Expected Rent|
|---|---|---|
|Actual rent|Actual rent <|Expected Rent|
|is GAV|Expected Rent because of vacancy|because of any other reason|
| |Expected Rent is GAV| |

# 23(2) Annual Value of self-occupied property

Where the property is self-occupied for own residence or unoccupied throughout the previous year owing to his employment, business or profession carried on at any other place and residing at that other place in a building not belonging to him, its Annual Value will be Nil, provided no other benefit is derived by the owner from such property.

An assessee can claim benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of one or two residential house properties self-occupied by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.172 INCOME TAX LAW

# 23(4) Annual Value of deemed to be let-out property

If more than two properties are so self-occupied/unoccupied, the assessee may claim benefit of Nil annual value in respect of any two properties at his option. The other property(s) would be deemed to be let out, in respect of which Expected Rent would be the GA V.

# 23(5) Annual value where the property held as stock-in-trade etc.

Where property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto is held as stock-in-trade and the whole or any part of the property is not let out during the whole or any part of the previous year, the annual value of such property or part of the property for the period upto 2 years from the end of the financial year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the competent authority shall be taken as “Nil”.

# 24 Deductions from Annual Value

1. 30% of Annual Value [Section 24(a)]
2. Interest on borrowed capital [Section 24(b)]: Interest payable on loans borrowed for the purpose of acquisition, construction, repairs, renewal or reconstruction can be claimed as deduction.

Pre-construction interest: Interest for the period prior to the previous year in which property is acquired or construction is completed. Pre-construction interest is allowable as deduction in 5 equal installments from the previous year of completion of construction or acquisition.

(a) Let out property: Whole of the amount of interest on borrowed capital payable during the previous year and apportioned pre-construction interest without any ceiling limit would be allowed as deduction.

(b) Self-occupied property:

1. Interest on loan taken for acquisition or construction of house on or after 1.4.99, where such construction is completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year in which capital was borrowed, aggregate interest paid or payable for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-construction interest).
2. In case of loan taken for repair, renovation or reconstruction at any point of time, aggregate interest paid
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

or payable for one or two self-occupied properties subject to a maximum of ` 30,000 (including apportioned pre-construction interest).

# Notes –

1. Total amount of interest deduction under (i) and (ii) in respect of one or two self-occupied properties owned by the assessee cannot exceed ` 2,00,000.
2. Interest deduction in respect of self-occupied property(ies) would be available only if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). If the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, deduction under section 24(b) in respect of interest on loan for self-occupied property is not allowed.

# 25 Inadmissible deductions

Interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside India shall not be deducted if –

- (a) tax has not been paid or deducted from such interest and
- (b) in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent

# 25A Taxability of recovery of unrealised rent & arrears of rent received

1. Taxable in the year of receipt/realisation
2. Deduction @30% of rent received/realised
3. Taxable even if assessee is not the owner of the property in the financial year of receipt/realisation

# 26 Co-owned property

1. Self-occupied property: The annual value of the property of each co-owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000/` 2,00,000, as the case may be, on account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). However, aggregate deduction of interest to each co-owner in respect of co-owned self-occupied property and any other self-occupied house property, if any, cannot exceed ` 30,000/` 2,00,000, as the case may be.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.174 INCOME TAX LAW

No deduction would be allowed in respect of interest on loan taken for purchase/construction/reconstruction/repairs of self occupied property where the assessee pays tax under the default tax regime.

# (ii) Let-out property:

The income from such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.

# 27 Deemed Ownership:

The following persons, though not legal owners of a property, are deemed to be the owners:

1. Transferor of the property, where the property is transferred to the spouse or to minor child except minor married daughter, without adequate consideration
2. Holder of an impartible estate
3. Member of a co-operative society etc.
4. Person in possession of a property
5. Person having right in a property for a period not less than 12 years

# Other important points

1. The Actual rent received/receivable should not include any amount of rent which is not capable of being realized i.e., unrealized rent while determining gross annual value in case let-out property, provided the conditions specified in Rule 4 are satisfied.

Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual value.
2. If a portion of a property is let-out and a portion is self-occupied, then, the income will be computed separately for let out and self-occupied portion.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Raman is a co-owner of a house property along with his brother holding equal share in the property.
|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|Municipal value of the property|1,60,000|
|Fair rent|1,50,000|
|Standard rent under the Rent Control Act|1,70,000|
|Rent received|15,000 p.m.|
|The loan for the construction of this property is jointly taken and the interest charged by the bank is|25,000|
|Out of which|21,000 has been paid.|
|Interest on the unpaid interest|450|
|To repay this loan, Raman and his brother have taken a fresh loan and interest charged on this loan is|5,000|
|The municipal taxes of|5,100 have been paid by the tenant.|

Compute the income from this property chargeable in the hands of Mr. Raman for the A.Y. 2024-25.
2. Mr. X owns one residential house in Mumbai. The house is having two identical units. First unit of the house is self-occupied by Mr. X and another unit is rented for
8,000 p.m. The rented unit was vacant for 2 months during the year. The particulars of the house for the previous year 2023-24 are as under:
|Standard rent|1,62,000 p.a.|
|---|---|
|Municipal valuation|1,90,000 p.a.|
|Fair rent|1,85,000 p.a.|
|Municipal tax (Paid by Mr. X)|5% of municipal valuation|
|Light and water charges|500 p.m.|
|Interest on borrowed capital|1,500 p.m.|
|Lease money|1,200 p.a.|
|Insurance charges|3,000 p.a.|
|Repairs|12,000 p.a.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.176 INCOME TAX LAW

Compute income from house property of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2024-25 if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 3.

Mr. Vikas owns a house property whose Municipal Value, Fair Rent and Standard Rent are ` 96,000, ` 1,26,000 and ` 1,08,000 (per annum), respectively. During the F.Y. 2023-24, one-third of the portion of the house was let out for residential purpose at a monthly rent of ` 5,000. The remaining two-third portion was self-occupied by him. Municipal tax @11% of municipal value was paid during the year.

The construction of the house began in June, 2016 and was completed on 31-5-2019. Vikas took a loan of ` 1,00,000 on 1-7-2016 for the construction of building. He paid interest on loan @ 12% per annum and every month such interest was paid.

Compute income from house property of Mr. Vikas for the A.Y. 2024-25 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 4.

Mrs. Rohini Ravi, a citizen of the U.S.A., is a resident and ordinarily resident in India during the financial year 2023-24. She owns a house property at Los Angeles, U.S.A., which is used as her residence. The annual value of the house is $20,000. The value of one USD ($) may be taken as ` 75.

She took ownership and possession of a flat in Chennai on 1.7.2023, which is used for self-occupation, while she is in India. The flat was used by her for 7 months only during the year ended 31.3.2024. The municipal valuation is ` 3,84,000 p.a. and the fair rent is ` 4,20,000 p.a. She paid the following to Corporation of Chennai:

|Property Tax|` 16,200|
|---|---|
|Sewerage Tax|` 1,800|

She had taken a loan from Standard Chartered Bank in June, 2021 for purchasing this flat. Interest on loan was as under:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Period prior to 1.4.2023|49,200|
|1.4.2023 to 30.6.2023|50,800|
|1.7.2023 to 31.3.2024|1,31,300|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

She had a house property in Bangalore, which was sold in March, 2020. In respect of this house, she received arrears of rent of ` 60,000 in March, 2024. This amount has not been charged to tax earlier.

Compute the income chargeable from house property of Mrs. Rohini Ravi for the A.Y. 2024-25 if she has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Would your answer change if she pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC?

# 5.

Two brothers Arun and Bimal are co-owners of a house property with equal share. The property was constructed during the financial year 2015-2016. The property consists of eight identical units and is situated at Cochin. During the financial year 2023-24, each co-owner occupied one unit for residence and the balance of six units were let out at a rent of ` 12,000 per month per unit. The municipal value of the house property is ` 9,00,000 and the municipal taxes are 20% of municipal value, which were paid during the year. The other expenses were as follows:

|(i) Repairs|40,000|
|---|---|
|(ii) Insurance premium (paid)|15,000|
|(iii) Interest payable on loan taken for construction of house|3,00,000|

One of the let out units remained vacant for four months during the year. Arun could not occupy his unit for six months as he was transferred to Chennai. He does not own any other house. The other income of Mr. Arun and Mr. Bimal are ` 2,90,000 and ` 1,80,000, respectively, for the financial year 2023-24.

Compute the income under the head ‘Income from House Property’ and the total income of two brothers for the A.Y. 2024-25 if they pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. Also, show the computation of income under this head, if they both exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.178 INCOME TAX LAW

# ANSWERS

# 1. Computation of income from house property of Mr. Raman for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Annual Value (See Note 1 below)|1,80,000| |
|Less: Municipal taxes – paid by the tenant, hence not deductible|Nil| |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|1,80,000| |
|Less: Deductions under section 24| | |
|(i) 30% of NAV|54,000| |
|(ii) Interest on housing loan (See Note 2 below)| | |
|- Interest on loan taken from bank|25,000| |
|- Interest on fresh loan to repay old loan for this property|5,000| |
|Total Deductions|84,000| |
|Income from house property|96,000| |
|50% share taxable in the hands of Mr. Raman (See Note 3 below)|48,000| |

# Notes:

1. Computation of Gross Annual Value (GAV)
GAV is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is the higher of municipal value and fair rent, but restricted to standard rent.

|Particulars|`|`|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|(a) Municipal value|1,60,000| | |
|(b) Fair rent|1,50,000| | |
|(c) Higher of (a) and (b)|1,60,000| | |
|(d) Standard rent|1,70,000| | |
|(e) Expected rent [lower of (c) and (d)]|1,60,000| | |
|(f) Actual rent [` 15,000 x 12]|1,80,000| | |
|(g) Gross Annual Value|1,80,000| | |

# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

2. Interest on housing loan is allowable as a deduction under section 24 on accrual basis. Further, interest on fresh loan taken to repay old loan is also allowable as deduction. However, interest on unpaid interest is not allowable as deduction under section 24.

3. Section 26 provides that where a house property is owned by two or more persons whose shares are definite and ascertainable, the share of each such person in the income of house property, as computed in accordance with sections 22 to 25, shall be included in his respective total income. Therefore, 50% of the total income from the house property is taxable in the hands of Mr. Raman since he is an equal owner of the property.

# 2. Computation of Income from house property for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|(A) Rented unit (50% of total area – See Note below)| | |
|Step I - Computation of Expected Rent| | |
|Municipal valuation (` 1,90,000 x ½)|95,000| |
|Fair rent (` 1,85,000 x ½)|92,500| |
|Standard rent (` 1,62,000 x ½)|81,000| |
|Expected Rent is higher of municipal valuation and fair rent, but restricted to standard rent|81,000| |
|Step II - Actual Rent| | |
|Rent received/receivable for the let out period|80,000|(` 8,000 x 10)|
|Step III – Computation of Gross Annual Value| | |
|The actual rent of ` 80,000 is lower than ER of ` 81,000 owing to vacancy, since, had the property not been vacant the actual rent would have been ` 96,000 (` 80,000 + ` 16,000, being notional rent for two months. Therefore, actual rent is the GAV.|Gross Annual Value|80,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes (5% of ` 95,000)|4,750| |
|Net Annual value|75,250| |

# 3.180 INCOME TAX LAW

Less : Deductions under section 24 -

|(i)|30% of net annual value|22,575|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|Interest on borrowed capital (` 750 x 12)|9,000|

Total Deductions: 31,575

Taxable income from let out portion: 43,675

# (B) Self occupied unit (50% of total area – See Note below)

Annual value: Nil

Less : Deduction under section 24 -

Interest on borrowed capital (` 750 x 12): 9,000

Total Deduction: 9,000

Loss from self occupied portion: (9,000)

Income from house property: 34,675

Note: No deduction will be allowed separately for light and water charges, lease money paid, insurance charges and repairs.

# 3. Computation of income from house property of Mr. Vikas for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from house property| | |
|I. Self-occupied portion (Two third)|Net Annual value|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24(b)|Interest on loan (See Note below) (` 18,600 x 2/3) [Allowable since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]|12,400|
|Loss from self occupied property| |(12,400)|
|II. Let-out portion (One third)|Gross Annual Value| |
|(a) Actual rent received (` 5,000 x 12)|60,000| |
|(b) Expected rent|36,000| |
|[higher of municipal valuation (i.e., ` 96,000) and fair rent (i.e., ` 1,26,000) but restricted to standard rent (i.e., ` 1,08,000)] = ` 1,08,000 x 1/3| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

|Higher of (a) or (b)|60,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Municipal taxes|3,520|
|(` 96,000 x 11% x 1/3)| |
|Net Annual Value|56,480|
|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|(a) 30% of NAV|16,944|
|(b) Interest on loan (See Note below)|(` 18,600 x 1/3)|
| |6,200|
| |33,336|
|Income from house property|20,936|

Note: Interest on loan taken for construction of building

Interest for the year (1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024) = 12% of ` 1,00,000 = ` 12,000

Pre-construction period interest = 12% of ` 1,00,000 for 33 months (from 1.07.2016 to 31.3.2019) = ` 33,000

Pre-construction period interest to be allowed in 5 equal annual installments of ` 6,600 from the year of completion of construction i.e., from F.Y. 2019-20 till F.Y. 2023-24.

Therefore, total interest deduction under section 24 = ` 12,000 + ` 6,600 = ` 18,600.

# 4.

(i) Since the assessee is a resident and ordinarily resident in India, her global income would form part of her total income i.e., income earned in India as well as outside India will form part of her total income.

She possesses a self-occupied house at Los Angeles as well as at Chennai. She can take the benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of both the house properties.

As regards the Bangalore house, arrears of rent will be chargeable to tax as income from house property in the year of receipt under section 25A. It is not essential that the assessee should continue to be the owner. 30% of the arrears of rent shall be allowed as deduction.

Accordingly, the income from house property of Mrs. Rohini Ravi for A.Y.2024-25 will be calculated as under:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.182 INCOME TAX LAW

# Particulars

# 1. Self-occupied house at Los Angeles

Annual value: Nil

Less: Deduction under section 24: Nil

Chargeable income from this house property: Nil

# 2. Self-occupied house property at Chennai

Annual value: Nil

Less: Deduction under section 24

|Interest on borrowed capital|1,91,940|
|---|---|
|(See Note below)|(1,91,940)|

# 3. Arrears in respect of Bangalore property (Section 25A)

|Arrears of rent received|60,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Deduction @ 30% u/s 25A(2)|18,000|
| |42,000|

Loss under the head "Income from house property": (1,49,940)

# Note: Interest on borrowed capital

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Interest for the current year (` 50,800 + ` 1,31,300)|1,82,100|
|Add: 1/5th of pre-construction interest (` 49,200 x 1/5)|9,840|
|Interest deduction allowable under section 24|1,91,940|

Interest deduction under section 24(b) is allowable since she has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(ii) Yes, the answer would change if she pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. Under the default tax regime, deduction under section 24(b) for interest is not available. Hence, she cannot claim deduction of ` 1,91,940 in respect of the Chennai house. Accordingly, income from house property would be ` 42,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY

# 3.183

(i) If Arun and Bimal pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC

# Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Arun (`)|Bimal (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Income from house property| | |
|I. Self-occupied portion (25%)| | |
|Annual value|Nil|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24(b)|Nil|Nil|
|Loss from self occupied property|Nil|Nil|
|II. Let-out portion (75%) – See Working Note below|1,25,850|1,25,850|
|Income from house property|1,25,850|1,25,850|
|Other Income|2,90,000|1,80,000|
|Total Income|4,15,850|3,05,850|

# Working Note – Computation of Income from Let-Out Portion of House Property

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Let-out portion (75%)| | |
|Gross Annual Value| | |
|(a) Municipal value (75% of ` 9 lakh)|6,75,000| |
|(b) Actual rent [(` 12000 x 6 x 12) – (` 12,000 x 1 x 4)]|8,16,000| |
|= ` 8,64,000 - ` 48,000 - whichever is higher|8,16,000| |
|Less: Municipal taxes 75% of ` 1,80,000 (20% of ` 9 lakh)|1,35,000| |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|6,81,000| |
|Less: Deduction under section 24| | |
|(a) 30% of NAV|2,04,300| |
|(b) Interest on loan taken for the house [75% of ` 3 lakh]|2,25,000| |
| |4,29,300| |
|Income from let-out portion of house property|2,51,700| |
|Share of each co-owner (50%)|1,25,850| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.184 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) If Arun and Bimal have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

# Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Arun (`)|Bimal (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Income from house property| | |
|I. Self-occupied portion (25%)| | |
|Annual value|Nil|Nil|
|Less: Deduction under section 24(b)| | |
|Interest on loan taken for construction|37,500|37,500|
|[Allowable since they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]|37,500|37,500|
|Loss from self occupied property|(37,500)|(37,500)|
|II. Let-out portion (75%) – See Working Note above|1,25,850|1,25,850|
|Income from house property|88,350|88,350|
|Other Income|2,90,000|1,80,000|
|Total Income|3,78,350|2,68,350|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# UNIT – 3: PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to-

- comprehend the meaning of “business” and “profession” and the scope of income chargeable to tax under this head;
- comprehend the meaning of speculative transaction and the tax treatment of loss incurred in speculation business;
- identify the expenditures/payments which are admissible as deduction, comprehend the conditions to be satisfied to avail such deductions, the limits, if any, specified in respect thereof;
- compute the deductions available while computing business income applying the relevant provisions under default tax regime under section 115BAC;
- compute the deductions available while computing business income applying the relevant provisions under normal provisions of the Act;
- identify the expenditures/payments which are not admissible as deduction;
- identify the deductions allowable only on actual payment;
- examine when certain receipts are deemed to be income chargeable to tax under this head;
- identify the assessees who are required to compulsorily maintain books of account and get them audited;
- apply the presumptive tax provisions under the Act to compute income from eligible business or profession;
- compute the business income by applying the charging and deeming provisions and allowing permissible deductions;
- compute the business income in cases where income is partly agricultural and partly business in nature.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.186 INCOME TAX LAW

# Proforma for computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession" under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Net profit as per statement of profit and loss|A| |
|Add: Expenses debited to statement of profit and loss but not allowable| | |
|• Depreciation as per books of account|xxx| |
|• Income-tax [disallowed u/s 40(a)(ii)]|xxx| |
|• 30% of sum payable to residents on which tax is not deducted at source or has not been remitted on or before the due date u/s 139(1), after deduction, disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) [The same is allowable in the year in which the tax is deducted and remitted]|xxx| |
|• Any expenditure incurred, in respect of which payment is made for goods, services or facilities to a related person, to the extent the same is excessive or unreasonable, in the opinion of the A.O, having regard to its FMV [disallowed u/s 40A(2)]|xxx| |
|• Any expenditure incurred in respect of which payment or aggregate of payments to a person exceeding ` 10,000 in a single day is made otherwise than by way of A/c payee cheque/bank draft/ use of ECS through bank A/c or through such other prescribed electronic mode (debit card, credit card, Net banking, RTGS, NEFT, IMPS, BHIM Aadhar Pay) [disallowed u/s 40A(3)]|xxx| |
|• Certain sums payable by the assessee which have not been paid during the relevant P.Y. in which the liability was incurred on or before the due date for filing return u/s 139(1) in respect of that P.Y. [disallowed u/s 43B]|xxx| |
|• Sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise beyond the time limit specified in section 15 of MSME Development Act, 2006 [disallowed u/s 43B]|xxx| |
|• Personal expenses [not allowable as per section 37]|xxx| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

|Capital expenditure [not allowable as per section 37]|xxx|
|---|---|
|Repairs of capital nature [not allowable as per Sections 30 & 31]|xxx|
|Amortization of preliminary expenditure u/s 35D/ expenditure incurred under voluntary retirement scheme u/s 35DDA [4/5th of such expenditure to be added back]|xxx|
|Family planning expenses not allowable in the case of a person other than a company|xxx|
|Fine or penalty paid for infringement or breach of law [However, penalty in the nature of damages for delay in completion of a contract, being compensatory in nature, is allowable]|xxx|
|All expenses related to income which is not taxable under this head e.g. municipal taxes in respect of residential house property|xxx|
|Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution to pension scheme u/s 80CCD exceeding 10% of the salary of the employee|xxx|

# Less:

# Expenditure allowable as deduction but not debited to statement of profit and loss

|Depreciation computed as per Rule 5 of Income-tax Rules, 1962|xxx|
|---|---|
|30% of expenditure disallowed in an earlier P.Y. due to non-deduction of tax at source/ non-remittance before due date u/s 139(1) of that year, allowed this year on remittance (This item of adjustment is generally given under “Additional information” in the question)|xxx|
|Amount disallowed in an earlier P.Y. as per section 43B, due to non-payment on or before due date u/s 139(1), allowed as deduction in this year on actual payment (This item of adjustment is generally given under “Additional information” in the question)|xxx|

# (C - D)

# Less:

# Income credited in statement of profit and loss but not taxable/taxable under any other head

Dividend income
xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.188 INCOME TAX LAW

- Agricultural income exempt under section 10(1) xxx
- Interest on securities/savings bank account/FD taxable under the head “Income from other sources” xxx
- Profit on sale of capital asset taxable under the head “Capital Gains” xxx
- Rent from house property taxable under the head “Income from house property” xxx
- Winnings from lotteries, horse races, games etc. taxable under the head “Income from other sources” xxx
- Gifts exempt or taxable under the head “Income from other sources” xxx
- Income-tax refund not taxable xxx
- Interest on income-tax refund taxable under the head “Income from other sources” xxx F

Add: Income chargeable under this head/Deemed Income [If the same is given as additional information and has not already been credited to Statement of Profit & Loss]

- Salary, remuneration, interest received by a partner from the firm, to the extent the same is deductible in the hands of the firm as per section 40(b) xxx
- Bad debt allowed as deduction u/s 36(1)(vii) in an earlier P.Y., now recovered [deemed as income u/s 41(4)] xxx
- Remission or cessation of a trading liability [deemed as income u/s 41(1)] xxx H

Profits and gains from business or profession (G + H) I

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.189

Proforma for computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” under optional tax regime taking business income computed under default tax regime under section 115BAC as the starting point

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Profits and gains from business or profession as per section 115BAC|A| |
|Less: Expenditure allowable as deduction| | |
|• Additional depreciation@20% of actual cost of new P & M acquired by an assessee engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing or generation, transmission or distribution of power (10% of actual cost, if put to use for less than 180 days in the year of acquisition) [Balance additional depreciation can be claimed in the next year i.e., P.Y.2024-25]|xxx| |
|• Balance additional depreciation @10% of actual cost of P & M acquired and installed during the P.Y. 2022-23 and put to use for less than 180 days in that year|xxx|B|
|Profits and gains from business or profession as per normal provisions of the Act|C|(A – B)|

Note - An assessee carrying on specified business and exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), is eligible for deduction u/s 35AD in respect of capital expenditure (other than land, goodwill and financial instruments) incurred for such business, subject to fulfillment of specified conditions. However, if he pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, he would not be eligible for deduction u/s 35AD.

The table in the next page depicts the allowability of deduction for expenditure incurred for in-house scientific research related to the business of the assessee and contribution to outsiders for scientific research/social science/statistical research under the default tax regime and optional tax regime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.190 INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction for expenditure incurred for in-house scientific research related to business and contribution to outsiders for scientific research/social science/statistical research

Under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC Under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

|Nature of Expenditure/ contribution for scientific research/social science/statistical research|Allowability of deduction|Treatment while computing income under the head “PGBP”|Allowability of deduction|Treatment while computing income under the head “PGBP”|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|I. In house research expenditure on scientific research related to assessee’s business|Revenue expenditure|Allowable as deduction|No adjustment required, since it is already debited to Profit & Loss A/c|Allowable as deduction|
|35(1)(i)|Any capital expenditure (other than cost of acquisition of land)|required, while computing income under the head “PGBP”|No adjustment required, since it is already debited to Profit & Loss A/c| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.191

Under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC

Under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

|Nature of Expenditure/ contribution for scientific research/social science/statistical research|Allowability of deduction under the head “PGBP”|Treatment while computing income|Allowability of deduction under the head “PGBP”|Treatment while computing income|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|II. Contribution to outsiders|35(1)(ii) Notified approved research association/university/college/other institution for scientific research|Not allowable as deduction if debited to Profit & Loss A/c|No adjustment required if given as additional information|Allowable as deduction while computing income under the head “PGBP”|
|35(1)(iia) Approved notified Company for scientific research|To be added back while computing income under the head “PGBP”|No adjustment required since it is already debited to profit and loss A/c|No adjustment required while computing income under the head “PGBP”| |
|35(1)(iii) Notified approved research association/university/college/other institution for research in social science or statistical research| | | | |
|35(2AA) Approved National Laboratory/University/IIT/specified person to be used for scientific research undertaken under an approved programme| | | | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.192 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3.1 MEANING OF ‘BUSINESS’ AND ‘PROFESSION’

The tax payable by an assessee on his income under this head is in respect of the profits and gains of any business or profession, carried on by him or on his behalf during the previous year.

|Business|Profession|
|---|---|
|The term “business” has been defined in section 2(13) to “include any trade, commerce or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture”.|The term “profession” has not been defined in the Act. It means an occupation requiring some degree of learning. The term ‘profession’ includes vocation as well [Section 2(36)].|
|- A painter, a sculptor, an author, an auditor, a lawyer, a doctor, an architect and even an astrologer are persons who can be said to be carrying on a profession but not business.
|- It is, however, not material whether a person is carrying on a ‘business’ or ‘profession’ or ‘vocation’ since for purposes of assessment, profits from all these sources are treated and taxed alike (except in case of tax audit and presumptive income provisions, where the rates and threshold limits are different for business and profession).
|
|Business necessarily means a continuous exercise of an activity with a profit motive; nevertheless, profit from a single venture in the nature of trade may also be treated as business.| |

# Meaning of ‘Profits’

1. Profits in cash or in kind: Profits may be realised in money or in money’s worth, i.e., in cash or in kind. Where profit is realised in any form other than cash, the cash equivalent of the receipt on the date of receipt must be taken as the value of the income received in kind.
2. Capital receipts: Capital receipts are not generally to be taken into account while computing profits under this head.
3. Voluntary receipts: Payment voluntarily made by persons who were under no obligation to pay anything at all would be income in the hands of the recipient, if they were received in the course of a business or by the exercise of a profession or vocation. Thus, any amount paid to a lawyer by a person.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

who was not a client, but who has been benefited by the lawyer’s professional service to another would be assessable as the lawyer’s income.

1. Application of the gains of trade is immaterial: Gains made even for the benefit of the community by a public body would be liable to tax. To attract the provisions of section 28, it is necessary that the business, profession or vocation should be carried on at least for some time during the accounting year but not necessarily throughout that year and not necessarily by the assessee-owner personally, but it should be under his direction and control.
2. Income from distinct businesses: The profits of each distinct business must be computed separately but the tax chargeable under this section is not on the separate income of every distinct business but on the aggregate profits of all the businesses carried on by the assessee.
3. Computation of profits: Profits should be computed after deducting the losses and expenses incurred for earning the income in the regular course of the business, profession, or vocation unless the loss or expenses is expressly or by necessary implication, disallowed by the Act. The charge is not on the gross receipts but on the profits and gains.
4. Legality of income: The illegality of a business, profession or vocation does not exempt its profits from tax. The revenue is not concerned with the taint of illegality in the income or its source. Thus, income tax is not restricted in its application to lawful business only. However, expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law would not be allowable as deduction while computing profits of such business.

# METHOD OF ACCOUNTING

Under section 145(1), income chargeable under the heads “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources” shall be computed in accordance with either the cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.

However, as per section 145B, certain income would be taxable in the following manner:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.194 INCOME TAX LAW

1. Interest received by an assessee on compensation or on enhanced compensation, shall be deemed to be the income of the year in which it is received
[Such income is taxable under the head “Income from other sources”]
2. Income referred to in section 2(24)(xviii) i.e., assistance in the form of a subsidy or grant or cash incentive or duty drawback or waiver or concession or reimbursement, by whatever name called, by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority or body or agency in cash or kind to the assessee shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which it is received, if not charged to income tax for any earlier previous year.

Under section 145(2), the Central Government is empowered to notify in the Official Gazette from time to time, income computation and disclosure standards (ICDSs) to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of any class of income.

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. S.O.3079(E) dated 29.9.2016, notified ten ICDSs to be applicable from A.Y.2017-18.

The notified ICDSs have to be followed by all assessees (other than an individual or a Hindu undivided family who is not required to get his accounts of the previous year audited in accordance with the provisions of section 44AB) following the mercantile system of accounting, for the purposes of computation of income chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”.

# The ten notified ICDSs are:

- ICDS I : Accounting Policies
- ICDS II : Valuation of Inventories
- ICDS III : Construction Contracts
- ICDS IV : Revenue Recognition
- ICDS V : Tangible Fixed Assets
- ICDS VI : The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
- ICDS VII : Government Grants
- ICDS VIII : Securities
- ICDS IX : Borrowing Costs
- ICDS X : Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets

Note: ICDSs would be dealt with in detail at Final Level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.3 INCOME CHARGEABLE UNDER THIS HEAD

# [SECTION 28]

The various items of income chargeable to tax as income under the head ‘profits and gains of business or profession’ are as under:

1. Income from business or profession: Income arising to any person by way of profits and gains from the business or profession carried on by him at any time during the previous year.
2. Any compensation or other payment due to or received by:

1. any person, by whatever name called, managing the whole or substantially the whole of -

1. the affairs of an Indian company or
2. the affairs in India of any other company

at or in connection with the termination of his management or office or the modification of any of the terms and conditions relating thereto;
2. any person, by whatever name called, holding an agency in India for any part of the activities relating to the business of any other person, at or in connection with the termination of the agency or the modification of any of the terms and conditions relating thereto;
3. any person, for or in connection with the vesting in the Government or in any corporation owned or controlled by the Government under any law for the time being in force, of the management of any property or business;
4. any person, by whatever name called, at or in connection with the termination or modification of the terms and conditions, of any contract relating to his business.
3. Income from specific services performed for its members by a trade, professional or business: Income derived by any trade, professional or similar associations from specific services rendered by them to their members. It may be noted that this forms an exception to the general principle governing the assessment of income of mutual associations such as chambers of commerce, stock brokers’ associations etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.196 INCOME TAX LAW

As a result, a trade, professional or similar association performing specific services for its members is to be deemed as carrying on business in respect of these services and on that assumption the income arising therefrom is to be subjected to tax. For this purpose, it is not necessary that the income received by the association should definitely or directly be related to these services.

# (iv) Incentives received or receivable by assessee carrying on export business:

- (a) Profit on sale of import entitlements: Profits on sale of a licence granted under the Imports (Control) Order, 19551 made under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 19472.
- (b) Cash assistance against exports under any scheme of GoI: Cash assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable by any person against exports under any scheme of the Government of India.
- (c) Customs duty or excise re-paid or repayable as drawback: Any Customs duty or Excise duty drawback repaid or repayable to any person against export under the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 19713.
- (d) Profit on transfer of Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme or Duty Free Replenishment Certificate: Any profit on the transfer of the Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme4 or Duty Free Replenishment Certificate, being Duty Remission Scheme, under the export and import policy formulated and announced under section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.

# (v) Value of any benefit or perquisite:

The value of any benefit or perquisite arising from business or the exercise of any profession, whether –

- convertible into money or not or
- in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind.

1 Now Foreign Trade (Exemption from application of Rules in certain cases) Order, 1993

2 Now Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992

3 Now Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 2017

4 The pre-export DEPB scheme was abolished with effect from 1 April 2000. After several extensions through the years, the post-export scheme was phased out on 30 September 2011 and thereafter DEPB items were incorporated into the Duty Drawback Schedule with effect from 1 October 2011.
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Example:

If a company provides rent free residential accommodation to a lawyer in consideration of professional services rendered by him to the company, the value of such accommodation would be assessable in the hands of the said lawyer as his income under the head “Profits and gains or business or profession”.

# (vi) Sum due to, or received by, a partner of a firm:

Any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, due to or received by a partner of a firm from such firm will be deemed to be income from business. However, where any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration by whatever name called, or any part thereof has not been allowed to be deducted under section 40(b), in the computation of the income of the firm the income to be taxed shall be adjusted to the extent of the amount disallowed.

Example:

A firm pays interest to a partner at 20% simple interest p.a. The allowable rate of interest is 12% p.a. Hence, the excess 8% paid will be disallowed in the hands of the firm. Since the excess interest has suffered tax in the hands of the firm, the same will not be taxed in the hands of the partner.

# Exemption of share income of a partner [Section 10(2A)]

Section 10(2A) exempts from tax a partner’s share in the total income of the firm. In other words, the partner’s share in the total income of the firm determined in accordance with the profit-sharing ratio will be exempt from tax.

# (vii) Any sum whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, under an agreement:

(a) for not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or profession; or However, the following sums received or receivable would not be chargeable to tax under the head “profits and gains from business or profession”:

(i) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of transfer of the right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing or right to carry on any business or profession, which is chargeable under the head “Capital gains”.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.198 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) any sum received as compensation, from the multilateral fund of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone layer under the United Nations Environment Programme, in accordance with the terms of agreement entered into with the Government of India.

(b) for not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trade mark, licence, franchise or any other business or commercial right of similar nature or information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or provision for services.

(viii) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy: Any sum received by the assessee, as an employer, under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy will be taxable as income from business.

(ix) Fair market value of inventory on its conversion/treatment as capital asset: Fair market value of inventory on the date of its conversion or treatment as capital asset, determined in the prescribed manner, would be chargeable to tax as business income.

(x) Sum received on account of capital asset referred under section 35AD: Any sum received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of any capital asset (in respect of which whole of the expenditure on such capital asset has been allowed as a deduction under section 35AD) being demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred.

# 3.4 SPECULATION BUSINESS

Explanation 2 to section 28 specifically provides that where an assessee carries on speculation business, that business of the assessee must be deemed as distinct and separate from any other business. This becomes necessary because section 73 provides that losses in speculation business unlike other business cannot be set-off against the profits of any business other than a speculation business.

Likewise, a loss in speculation business carried forward to a subsequent year can be set-off only against the profit and gains of any speculation business in the subsequent year. Profits and losses resulting from speculative transaction must,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

therefore, be treated as separate and distinct from profits and gains of business and profession from any other business.

# Meaning of Speculative Transaction

“Speculative transaction” means a transaction in which a contract for the purchase or sales of any commodity including stocks and shares is periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of the commodity or scrips [Section 43(5)].

Where any part of the business of a company consists in the purchase and sale of the shares of other companies, such a company shall be deemed to be carrying on speculation business to the extent to which the business consists of the purchase and sale of such shares.

However, this deeming provision does not apply to the following companies –

1. A company whose gross total income consists of mainly income chargeable under the heads “Interest on securities”, “Income from house property”, “Capital gains” and “Income from other sources”;
2. A company, the principal business of which is –
1. the business of trading in shares; or
2. the business of banking; or
3. the granting of loans and advances.

Accordingly, if these companies carry on the business of purchase and sale of shares of other companies, they would not be deemed to be carrying on speculation business. [Explanation to section 73]

# Transactions not deemed to be speculative transactions

The following forms of transactions shall not be deemed to be speculative transaction:

1. Hedging contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise: A contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise entered into by a person in the course of his manufacturing or merchandising business to guard against loss through future price fluctuations in respect of his contracts for the actual delivery of goods manufactured by him or merchandise sold by him; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.200 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Hedging contract in respect of stocks and shares: A contract in respect of stocks and shares entered into by a dealer or investor therein to guard against loss in his holdings of stocks and shares through price fluctuation; or

(iii) Forward contract: A contract entered into by a member of a forward market or stock exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of jobbing or arbitrage to guard against any loss which may arise in the ordinary course of his business as a member; or

(iv) Trading in derivatives: An eligible transaction (transaction carried out electronically through SEBI registered stockbroker or sub broker or intermediary) carried out in respect of trading in derivatives in a recognized stock exchange.

(v) Trading in commodity derivatives: An eligible transaction (transaction carried out electronically through a member or intermediary registered under the bye-laws, rules and regulations of the recognized stock exchange) in respect of trading in commodity derivatives carried out in a recognised stock exchange, which is chargeable to commodities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2013. However, the requirement of chargeability of commodities transaction tax is not applicable in respect of trading in agricultural commodity derivatives.

# 3.5 COMPUTATION OF PROFITS AND GAINS FROM BUSINESS OR PROFESSION [SECTION 29]

According to section 29, the profits and gains of any business or profession are to be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in sections 30 to 43D. It must, however, be remembered that in addition to the specific allowances and deductions stated in sections 30 to 36, the Act further permits allowance of items of expenses under the residuary section 37(1), which extends the allowance to items of business expenditure not covered by sections 30 to 36, where these are allowable according to accepted commercial practices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.201 Computation of profits and gains from business or profession [Section 29]

|Admissible deductions|Inadmissible deductions|Payments not deductible in certain circumstances|Profits chargeable to tax|Other provisions|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|[Sections 30 to 37]|[Section 40]|[Section 41]|[Section 40A]| |

# 3.6 ADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTIONS 30 TO 37]

(i) Rent, rates, taxes, repairs and insurance for buildings [Section 30]

Section 30 allows deduction in respect of the rent, rates, taxes, repairs and insurance of buildings used by the assessee for the purposes of his business or profession.

- Where the premises are occupied by the assessee as a tenant, the rent paid for such premises and the amount paid on account of cost of repairs, if the assessee has undertaken to bear such repairs to the premises.
- Occupation of premises by the assessee being the owner: Where the assessee himself is owner of the premises and occupies them for his business purposes, no notional rent would be allowed under this section. However, where a firm runs its business in the premises owned by one of its partners, the rent payable to the partner will be an allowable deduction to the extent it is reasonable and is not excessive.
- Repairs of the premises: Apart from rent, this section allows deductions in respect of expenses incurred on account of repairs to building in case where
- the assessee is the owner of the building or
- the assessee is a tenant who has undertaken to bear the cost of repairs to the premises.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.202 INCOME TAX LAW

Even if the assessee occupies the premises otherwise than as a tenant or owner, i.e., as a lessee, licensee or mortgagee with possession, he is entitled to a deduction under the section in respect of current repairs to the premises.

- Cost of repairs and current repairs of capital nature not to be allowed as deduction [Explanation to section 30]: Amount paid on account of the cost of repairs to the premises occupied by the assessee as a tenant and the amount paid on account of current repairs to the premises occupied by the assessee, otherwise than as a tenant, shall not include any capital nature expenditure. In other words, cost of repairs and current repairs other than of capital nature is allowed as deduction while computing business income.
- Other expenses: In addition, deductions are allowed in respect of expenses by way of land revenue, local rates, municipal taxes and insurance in respect of the premises used for the purposes of the business or profession. Cesses, rates and taxes levied by a foreign Government are also allowed.
- Premises used partly for business and partly for other purposes: Where the premises are used partly for business and partly for other purposes, only a proportionate part of the expenses attributable to that part of the premises used for purposes of business will be allowed as a deduction [Section 38(1)].

# (ii) Repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and furniture [Section 31]

Section 31 allows deduction in respect of the expenses on current repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and furniture in computing the income from business or profession.

- Usage of the asset for business: In order to claim this deduction, the assets must have been used for purposes of the assessee’s own business, the profits of which are being taxed. The word ‘used’ has to be read in a wide sense so as to include active as well as passive use. However, insurance and repair charges of assets which are owned by the assessee but have not been used for the business during the previous year would not be allowed as a deduction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.203

Even if an asset is used for a part of the previous year, the assessee is entitled to the deduction of the full amount of expenses on repair and insurance charges and not merely an amount proportionate to the period of use.

- Repairs exclude replacement or reconstruction: The term ‘repairs’ will include renewal or renovation of an asset but not its replacement or reconstruction.
- The deduction allowable under this section is only of current repairs but not arrears of repairs for earlier years even though they may still rank for a deduction under section 37(1).
- Insurance premium: The deduction allowable in respect of premia paid for insuring the machinery, plant or furniture is subject to the following conditions:
- The insurance must be against the risk of damage or destruction of the machinery, plant or furniture.
- The assets must be used by the assessee for the purposes of his business or profession during the accounting year.
- The premium should have been actually paid (or payable under the mercantile system of accounting).
- The premium may even take the form of contribution to a trade association which undertakes to indemnify and insure its members against loss; such premium or contribution would be deductible as an allowance under this section even if a part of it is returnable to the insured in certain circumstances.
- It does not matter if the payment of the claim will enure to the benefit of someone other than the owner.
- Current repairs of capital nature not to be allowed [Explanation to section 31]: Amount paid on account of current repairs of machinery, plant or furniture shall not include any capital nature expenditure. In other words, current repairs other than of capital nature expenditure is allowed as deduction in the computation of income under the head “profits and gains of business or profession”.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.204 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iii) Depreciation [Section 32]

1. Charge of depreciation mandatory: Section 32 allows a deduction in respect of depreciation resulting from the diminution or exhaustion in the value of certain capital assets. Explanation 5 to this section provides that deduction on account of depreciation shall be made compulsorily, whether or not the assessee has claimed the deduction in computing his total income.
2. Conditions to be satisfied for allowance of depreciation: The allowance of depreciation which is regulated by Rule 5 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, is subject to the following conditions which are cumulative in their application.

1. The assets in respect of which depreciation is claimed must belong to either of the following categories, namely -

1. buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets;
2. know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, being intangible assets acquired on or after 1st April, 1998, not being goodwill of a business or profession.

The depreciation in the value of any other capital assets cannot be claimed as a deduction from the business income.

No depreciation is allowable on the cost of the land on which the building is erected because the term ‘building’ refers only to superstructure but not the land on which it has been erected.

The term ‘plant’ as defined in section 43(3) includes ships, books, vehicles, scientific apparatus and surgical equipment used for the purposes of the business or profession but does not include tea bushes or livestock or buildings or furniture and fittings.

The word ‘plant’ does not include an animal, human body or stock-in-trade. Thus, plant includes all goods and chattels, fixed or movable, which a businessman keeps for employment in his business with some degree of durability.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.205

The expression ‘plant’ includes part of a plant (e.g., the engine of a vehicle); machinery includes part of machinery and building includes a part of the building. Similarly, the term ‘buildings’ includes within its scope roads, bridges, culverts, wells and tubewells.

# (b)

The assets should be actually used by the assessee for purposes of his business during the previous year - The asset must be put to use at any time during the previous year. The amount of depreciation allowance is not proportionate to the period of use during the previous year.

Asset used for less than 180 days - It has been provided that where any asset is acquired by the assessee during the previous year and is put to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of less than 180 days, depreciation shall be allowed at 50% of the allowable depreciation according to the percentage prescribed in respect of the block of assets comprising such asset. It is significant to note that this restriction applies only to the year of acquisition and not for subsequent years.

If the assets are not used exclusively for the business or profession of the assessee but for other purposes as well, the depreciation allowable would be a proportionate part of the depreciation allowance to which the assessee would be otherwise entitled. This is provided in section 38.

Depreciation would be allowable to the owner even in respect of assets which are actually utilized by another person e.g., a lessee or licensee. The deduction on account of depreciation would be allowed under this section to the owner who has let on hire his building, machinery, plant or furniture provided that letting out of such assets is the business of the assessee. In other cases where the letting out of such assets does not constitute the business of the assessee, the deduction on account of depreciation would still be allowable under section 57(ii).

Use includes passive use in certain circumstances: One of the conditions for claim of depreciation is that the asset must be “used for the purpose of business or profession”. Courts have held that, in
# 3.206 INCOME TAX LAW

Certain circumstances, an asset can be said to be in use even when it is “kept ready for use”. For example, stand by equipment and fire extinguishers can be capitalized if they are ‘ready for use’. Likewise, machinery spares which can be used only in connection with an item of tangible fixed asset and their use is expected to be irregular, has to be capitalised. Hence, in such cases, the term “use” embraces both active use and passive use. However, such passive use should also be for business purposes.

(c) The assessee must own the assets, wholly or partly - In the case of buildings, the assessee must own the superstructure and not necessarily the land on which the building is constructed. In such cases, the assessee should be a lessee of the land on which the building stands and the lease deed must provide that the building will belong to the lessor of the land upon the expiry of the period of lease. Thus, no depreciation will be allowed to an assessee in respect of an asset which he does not own but only uses or hires for purposes of his business.

In this connection, students may note that Explanation 1 to section 32 provides that where the business or profession of the assessee is carried on in a building not owned by him but in respect of which the assessee holds a lease or other right of occupancy, and any capital expenditure is incurred by the assessee for the purposes of the business or profession or the construction of any structure or doing of any work by way of renovation, extension or improvement to the building, then depreciation will be allowed as if the said structure or work is a building owned by the assessee. Depreciation is allowable not only in respect of assets “wholly” owned by the assessee but also in respect of assets “partly” owned by him and used for the purposes of his business or profession.

# (3) Computation of Depreciation Allowance

Depreciation allowance will be calculated on the following basis:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.207

# (i) Power generation undertakings:

In the case of assets of an undertaking engaged in generation or generation and distribution of power, such percentage on the actual cost to the assessee as prescribed by Rule 5(1A).

Rule 5(1A) - As per this rule, the depreciation on the abovementioned assets shall be calculated at the percentage of the actual cost at rates specified in Appendix IA of these rules. However, the aggregate depreciation allowed in respect of any asset for different assessment years shall not exceed the actual cost of the asset. It is further provided that such an undertaking as mentioned above has the option of being allowed depreciation on the written down value of such block of assets as are used for its business at rates specified in Appendix I to these rules. However, such option must be exercised before the due date for furnishing return under section 139(1) for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which it begins to generate power. It is further provided that any such option once exercised shall be final and shall apply to all subsequent assessment years.

# (ii) Block of assets:

In the case of any block of assets, at such percentage of the written down value of the block, as may be prescribed by Rule 5(1).

Block of Assets: A “block of assets” is defined in section 2(11), as a group of assets falling within a class of assets comprising -

- (a) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or furniture;
- (b) intangible assets, being know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licenses, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, not being goodwill of a business or profession,

in respect of which the same percentage of depreciation is prescribed.

Know-how - In this context, ‘know-how’ means any industrial information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or in the working of a mine, oil-well or other sources of mineral deposits (including searching for discovery or testing of deposits for the winning of access thereto).

# (iii) Additional depreciation on Plant or Machinery acquired:

In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and paying tax as per the
# 3.208 INCOME TAX LAW

Optional tax regime under the regular provisions of the Act, additional depreciation is allowed on any new machinery or plant (other than ships and aircraft) acquired and installed by an assessee engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing or in the business of generation, transmission or distribution of power at the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.

Asset put to use for less than 180 days: Additional depreciation @10% (i.e., 50% of additional depreciation of 20%) to be allowed, where the plant or machinery is put to use for less than 180 days during the previous year in which such asset is acquired. Further, the balance additional depreciation @10% (i.e., remaining 50% of the additional depreciation of 20%) on new plant or machinery acquired and used for less than 180 days, which has not been allowed in the year of acquisition and installation of such plant or machinery, shall be allowed in the immediately succeeding previous year if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A) in the immediately succeeding previous year.

# Plant and Machinery not qualifying for additional depreciation

Such additional depreciation will not be available in respect of:

1. Any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee, was used within or outside India by any other person; or
2. Any machinery or plant installed in office premises, residential accommodation, or in any guest house; or
3. Office appliances or road transport vehicles; or
4. Any machinery or plant, the whole or part of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and Gains of Business or Profession” of any one previous year.

# Eligibility for grant of additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia)

In the case of an assessee engaged in printing or printing and publishing [Circular No. 15/2016, dated 19-5-2016] An assessee, engaged in the business of manufacture or production of an article or thing, is eligible to claim additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia) in addition to the normal depreciation under section 32(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.209

The CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that the business of printing or printing and publishing amounts to manufacture or production of an article or thing and is, therefore, eligible for additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia).

Additional depreciation would be allowed to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable when the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

(iv) Terminal depreciation: In case of a power concern as covered under clause (i) above, if any asset is sold, discarded, demolished or otherwise destroyed in the previous year (other than the previous year in which it is first brought into use) the depreciation amount will be the amount by which the moneys payable in respect of such building, machinery, plant or furniture, together with the amount of scrap value, if any, falls short of the written down value thereof. The depreciation will be available only if the deficiency is actually written off in the books of the assessee.

# Meaning of certain term

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Moneys payable|includes —|
| |(a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys payable in respect thereof;|
| |(b) where the building, machinery, plant or furniture is sold, the price for which it is sold.|

# Rates of depreciation

All assets have been divided into four main categories and rates of depreciation as prescribed by Rule 5(1) are given below:

# PART A TANGIBLE ASSETS

|I|Buildings| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Block 1.|Buildings which are used mainly for residential purposes except hotels and boarding houses| | |5%|
|Block 2.|Buildings which are not used mainly for residential purposes and not covered by Block (1) above and (3) below| | |10%|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.210 INCOME TAX LAW

# Block 3.

Buildings acquired on or after 1st September, 2002 for installing machinery and plant forming part of water supply project or water treatment system and which is put to use for the purpose of business of providing infrastructure facilities

40%

# Block 4.

Purely temporary erections such as wooden structures

40%

# II Furniture and Fittings

# Block 1.

Furniture and fittings including electrical fittings

10%

[“Electrical fittings” include electrical wiring, switches, sockets, other fittings and fans, etc.]

# III Plant & Machinery

# Block 1.

Motor cars other than those used in a business of running them on hire, acquired during the period from 23.8.2019 to 31.03.2020 and put to use on or before 31.03.2020

30%

# Block 2.

Motor cars other than those used in a business of running them on hire, acquired or put to use on or after 1-4-1990

15%

[Other than motor cars mentioned in Block 1 above]

# Block 3.

Motors buses, motor lorries, motor taxis used in a business of running them on hire, acquired during the period from 23.8.2019 to 31.03.2020 and put to use on or before 31.03.2020

45%

# Block 4.

Motors buses, motor lorries, motor taxis used in the business of running them on hire

30%

[Other than mentioned in Block 3 above]

# Block 5.

Moulds used in rubber and plastic goods factories

30%

# Block 6.

Aeroplanes, Aeroengines

40%

# Block 7.

Specified air pollution control equipments, water pollution control equipments, solid waste control equipment and solid waste recycling and resource recovery systems

40%

# Block 8.

Plant & Machinery used in semi-conductor industry covering all Integrated Circuits (ICs) (other than mentioned in Block 7 Above)

30%

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

|Block 9.|Life-saving medical equipment|40%|
|---|---|---|
|Block 10.|Machinery and plant, acquired and installed on or after the 1ˢᵗ September, 2002 in a water supply project or a water treatment system and which is put to use for the purpose of business of providing infrastructure facility|40%|
|Block 11.|Containers made of glass or plastic used as re-fills|40%|
|Block 12.|Energy Saving Devices (as specified)|40%|
|Block 13.|Renewable Energy Saving Devices (as specified)|40%|
| |(i) Electrically operated vehicles including battery powered or fuel-cell powered vehicles|40%|
| |(ii) Windmills and any specially designed devices which run on windmills installed on or after 1.4.2014|40%|
| |(iii) Any special devices including electric generators and pumps running on wind energy installed on or after 1.4.2014|40%|
|Block 14.|Windmills and any specially designed devices running on windmills installed on or before 31.3.2014 and any special devices including electric generators and pumps running on wind energy installed on or before 31.3.2014|15%|
|Block 15.|Computers including computer software|40%|
|Block 16.|Books (annual publications or other than annual publications) owned by assessees carrying on a profession|40%|
|Block 17.|Books owned by assessees carrying on business in running lending libraries|40%|
|Block 18.|Plant & machinery (General rate)|15%|

# IV Ships

|Block 1.|Ocean-going ships|20%|
|---|---|---|
|Block 2.|Vessels ordinarily operating on inland waters not covered by Block (3) below|20%|
|Block 3.|Speed boats operating on inland water|20%|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.212 INCOME TAX LAW

# PART B INTANGIBLE ASSETS

Know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, not being goodwill of a business or profession

Note: Students should refer to Income-tax Rules, 1962 for the detailed classification of assets under Rule 5(1) and the rates applicable thereto.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. X, a proprietor engaged in manufacturing business, furnishes the following particulars:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(1) Opening balance of plant and machinery as on 1.4.2023 (i.e., WDV as on 31.3.2023 after reducing depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23)|30,00,000|
|(2) New plant and machinery purchased and put to use on 8.06.2023|20,00,000|
|(3) New plant and machinery acquired and put to use on 15.12.2023|8,00,000|
|(4) Computer acquired and installed in the office premises on 2.1.2024|3,00,000|

Compute the amount of depreciation and additional depreciation for the A.Y. 2024-25, if Mr. X has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Assume that all the assets were purchased by way of account payee cheque.

# SOLUTION

Computation of depreciation and additional depreciation for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (15%)|Computer (40%)|
|---|---|---|
|Normal depreciation @15% on ` 50,00,000 [See Working Notes 1 & 2]|7,50,000|-|
|@7.5% (50% of 15%, since put to use for less than 180 days) on ` 8,00,000|60,000|-|
|@20% (50% of 40%, since put to use for less than 180 days) on ` 3,00,000|-|60,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.213

# Additional Depreciation

|@20% on ` 20,00,000 (new plant and machinery put to use for more than 180 days)|4,00,000|-|
|---|---|---|
|@10% (50% of 20%, since put to use for less than 180 days) on ` 8,00,000|80,000|-|
|Total depreciation|12,90,000|60,000|

# Working Notes:

# (1) Computation of written down value of Plant & Machinery

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (`)|Computer (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Opening balance as on 1.4.2023|30,00,000|-|
|Add: Plant & Machinery purchased on 08.6.2023|20,00,000|-|
|Add: Plant & Machinery acquired on 15.12.2023|8,00,000|-|
|Computer acquired and installed in the office premises|-|3,00,000|
|Written down value as on 31.03.2024|58,00,000|3,00,000|

# (2) Composition of plant and machinery included in the WDV

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (`)|Computer (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Plant and machinery put to use for 180 days or more|50,00,000|-|
|[` 30,00,000 (WDV) + ` 20,00,000 (purchased on 8.6.2023)]| | |
|Plant and machinery put to use for < 180 days|8,00,000|-|
|Computers put to use for < 180 days|-|3,00,000|
| |58,00,000|3,00,000|

# Notes:

(1) Where an asset acquired during the previous year is put to use for less than 180 days in that previous year, the amount of deduction allowable as normal depreciation and additional depreciation would be restricted to 50% of amount computed in accordance with the prescribed percentage.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.214 INCOME TAX LAW

Therefore, normal depreciation on plant and machinery acquired and put to use on 15.12.2023 and computer acquired and installed on 02.01.2024, is restricted to 50% of 15% and 40%, respectively. The additional depreciation on the said plant and machinery is restricted to ` 80,000, being 10% (i.e., 50% of 20%) of ` 8 lakh.

Mr. X is eligible for additional depreciation since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(2) As per third proviso to section 32(1)(ii), the balance additional depreciation of ` 80,000 being 50% of ` 1,60,000 (20% of ` 8,00,000) would be allowed as deduction in the A.Y.2025-26.

(3) As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in the case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after 31.3.2005 by an assessee engaged, inter alia, in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing, @20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant. However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter alia, any machinery or plant installed in office premises, residential accommodation or in any guest house. Accordingly, additional depreciation is not allowable on computer installed in the office premises.

# (5) Actual Cost [Section 43(1)]

The expression “actual cost” means the actual cost of the asset to the assessee as reduced by that portion of the cost thereof, if any, as has been met directly or indirectly by any other person or authority.

However, where an assessee incurs any expenditure for acquisition of any asset or part thereof in respect of which a payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode, exceeds ` 10,000, such expenditure shall not form part of actual cost of such asset [Second proviso to section 43(1)].

The prescribed electronic modes include credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic)
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].

# Actual cost in certain special situations [Explanations to section 43(1)]

1. Asset used for business after it ceases to be used for scientific research: Where an asset is used for the purposes of business after it ceases to be used for scientific research related to that business, the actual cost to the assessee for depreciation purposes shall be the actual cost to the assessee as reduced by any deduction allowed under section 35(1)(iv) [Explanation 1].
2. Inventory converted into capital asset and used for business or profession: Where inventory is converted or treated as a capital asset and is used for the purpose of business or profession, the fair market value of such inventory as on the date of its conversion into capital asset determined in the prescribed manner, shall be the actual cost of such capital asset to the assessee [Explanation 1A].
3. Asset is acquired by way of gift or inheritance: Where an asset is acquired by way of gift or inheritance, its actual cost shall be the actual cost to the previous owner minus depreciation allowable to the assessee as if asset was the only asset in the relevant block of assets [Explanation 2]. Further, any expenditure incurred by the assessee such as expenditure on freight, installation etc. of such asset would also be includible in the actual cost.
4. Second hand asset: Where, before the date of its acquisition by the assessee, the asset was at any time used by any other person for the purposes of his business or profession, and the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the main purpose of the transfer of the asset directly or indirectly to the assessee was the reduction of liability of income-tax directly or indirectly to the assessee (by claiming depreciation with reference to an enhanced cost) the actual cost to the assessee shall be taken to be such an amount which the Assessing Officer may, with the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner, determine, having regard to all the circumstances of the case [Explanation 3].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.216 INCOME TAX LAW

(v) Re-acquisition of asset: Where any asset which had once belonged to the assessee and had been used by him for the purposes of his business or profession and thereafter ceased to be his property by reason of transfer or otherwise, is re-acquired by him, the actual cost to the assessee shall be —

- (a) the actual cost when he first acquired the asset minus depreciation allowable to the assessee as if asset was the only asset in the relevant block of assets; or
- (b) the actual price for which the asset is re-acquired by him whichever is less [Explanation 4].

(vi) Acquisition of asset previously owned by any person to whom such asset is given on lease, hire or otherwise: Where before the date of acquisition by the assessee say, Mr. A, the assets were at any time used by any other person, say Mr. B, for the purposes of his business or profession and depreciation allowance has been claimed in respect of such assets in the case of Mr. B and such person acquires on lease, hire or otherwise, assets from Mr. A, then, the actual cost of the transferred assets, in the case of Mr. A, shall be the same as the written down value of the said assets at the time of transfer thereof by Mr. B [Explanation 4A].

Example: We can explain the above as follows— A person (say “A”) owns an asset and uses it for the purposes of his business or profession. A has claimed depreciation in respect of such asset. The said asset is transferred by A to another person (say “B”). A then acquires the same asset back from B on lease, hire or otherwise. B being the new owner will be entitled to depreciation. In the above situation, the cost of acquisition of the transferred assets in the hands of B shall be the same as the written down value of the said assets at the time of transfer. Explanation 4A overrides Explanation 3.

Explanation 3 to section 43(1) deals with a situation where a transfer of any asset is made with the main purpose of reduction of tax liability (by claiming depreciation on enhanced cost), and the Assessing Officer, having satisfied himself about such purpose of transfer with
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

the prior approval of the joint commissioner, may determine the actual cost having regard to all the circumstances of the case.

In the Explanation 4A, a non-obstante clause has been included to the effect that Explanation 4A will have an overriding effect over Explanation 3. The result of this is that there is no necessity of finding out whether the main purpose of the transaction is reduction of tax liability. Explanation 4A is activated in every situation described above without inquiring about the main purpose.

(vii) Building previously the property of the assessee: Where a building which was previously the property of the assessee is brought into use for the purposes of the business or profession, its actual cost to the assessee shall be the actual cost of the building to the assessee, as reduced by an amount equal to the depreciation calculated at the rates in force on that date that would have been allowable had the building been used for the purposes of the business or profession since the date of its acquisition by the assessee [Explanation 5].

# ILLUSTRATION 2

A car purchased by Dr. Soman on 10.08.2020 for ` 5,25,000 for personal use is brought into professional use on 1.07.2023 by him, when its market value was ` 2,50,000.

Compute the actual cost of the car and the amount of depreciation for the A.Y. 2024-25 assuming the rate of depreciation to be 15%.

# SOLUTION

As per section 43(1), the expression “actual cost” would mean the actual cost of asset to the assessee.

The purchase price of ` 5,25,000 is, therefore, the actual cost of the car to Dr. Soman. Market value (i.e. ` 2,50,000) on the date when the asset is brought into professional use is not relevant.

Therefore, amount of depreciation on car as per section 32 for the A.Y.2024-25 would be ` 78,750, being ` 5,25,000 x 15%.

Note: Explanation 5 to section 43(1) providing for reduction of notional depreciation from the date of acquisition of asset for personal use to determine actual cost of the asset is applicable only in case of building.
# 3.218 INCOME TAX LAW

which is initially acquired for personal use and later brought into professional use. It is not applicable in respect of other assets.

(viii) Capitalization of interest paid or payable in connection with acquisition of an asset: Certain taxpayers have, with a view to obtain more tax benefits and reduce the tax outflow, resorted to the method of capitalising interest paid or payable in connection with acquisition of an asset relatable to the period after such asset is first put to use. This capitalisation implies inclusion of such interest in the ‘Actual Cost’ of the asset for the purposes of claiming depreciation, investment allowance etc. under the Income-tax Act, 1961. This was never the legislative intent nor was it in accordance with recognised accounting practices. Therefore, with a view to counteracting tax avoidance through this method and placing the matter beyond doubt, Explanation 8 to section 43(1) provides that any amount paid or payable as interest in connection with the acquisition of an asset and relatable to period after asset is first put to use shall not be included and shall be deemed to have never been included in the actual cost of the asset [Explanation 8].

(ix) Amount of duty of excise or additional duty leviable shall be reduced if credit is claimed: Where an asset is or has been acquired by an assessee, the actual cost of asset shall be reduced by the amount of duty of excise or the additional duty leviable under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 in respect of which a claim of credit has been made and allowed under the Central Excise Rules, 1944⁵ [Explanation 9].

(x) Subsidy or grant or reimbursement: Where a portion of the cost of an asset acquired by the assessee has been met directly or indirectly by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority established under any law or by any other person, in the form of a subsidy or grant or reimbursement (by whatever name called), then, so much of the cost as is relatable to such subsidy or grant or reimbursement shall not be included in the actual cost of the asset to the assessee.

Now Central Excise Rules, 2002

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

However, where such subsidy or grant or reimbursement is of such nature that it cannot be directly relatable to the asset acquired, so much of the amount which bears to the total subsidy or reimbursement or grant the same proportion as such asset bears to all the assets in respect of or with reference to which the subsidy or grant or reimbursement is so received, shall not be included in the actual cost of the asset to the assessee [Explanation 10].

(xi) Asset is acquired outside India by an assessee, being a non-resident and such asset is brought by him to India: Where an asset is acquired outside India by an assessee, being a non-resident and such asset is brought by him to India and used for the purposes of his business or profession, the actual cost of asset to the assessee shall be the actual cost the asset to the assessee, as reduced by an amount equal to the amount of depreciation calculated at the rate in force that would have been allowable had the asset been used in India for the said purposes since the date of its acquisition by the assessee [Explanation 11].

(xii) Capital asset on which deduction is allowable under section 35AD: Explanation 13 to section 43(1) provides that the actual cost of any capital asset, on which deduction has been allowed or is allowable to the assessee under section 35AD, shall be Nil. This would be applicable in the case of transfer of asset by the assessee where -

- (1) the assessee himself has claimed deduction under section 35AD; or
- (2) the previous owner has claimed deduction under section 35AD.

This would be applicable where the capital asset is acquired by the assessee by way of -

- (a) gift, will or an irrevocable trust;
- (b) any distribution on liquidation of the company;
- (c) any distribution of capital assets on total or partial partition of a HUF;
- (d) any transfer of a capital asset by a holding company to its 100% subsidiary company, being an Indian company;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.220 INCOME TAX LAW

(e) any transfer of a capital asset by a subsidiary company to its 100% holding company, being an Indian company;

(f) any transfer of a capital asset by the amalgamating company to an amalgamated company in a scheme of amalgamation, if the amalgamated company is an Indian company;

(g) any transfer of a capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting company in a scheme of demerger, if the resulting company is an Indian company;

(h) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a firm to a company as a result of succession of the firm by a company in the business carried on by the firm, or any transfer of a capital asset to a company in the course of demutualization or corporatisation of a recognized stock exchange in India as a result of which an association of persons or body of individuals is succeeded by such company (fulfilling the conditions specified);

(i) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a sole proprietary concern to a company, where the sole proprietary concern is succeeded by a company (fulfilling the conditions specified).

(j) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a private company or unlisted public company to an LLP as a result of conversion of the such company into LLP (fulfilling the conditions prescribed).

However, where an asset, in respect of which deduction is claimed and allowed under section 35AD is deemed to be the income of the assessee in accordance with the provisions of section 35AD(7B) (on account of asset, being used for a purpose other than specified business under section 35AD), the actual cost of the asset to the assessee shall be actual cost to assessee as reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable had the asset been used for the purpose of business, calculated at the rate in force, since the date of its acquisition [Proviso to Explanation 13 to section 43(1)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.221

# (6) Written down value [Section 43(6)]

(i) Assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year: In the case of assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year, the written down value means the actual cost to the assessee.

(ii) Assets acquired before the previous year: In the case of assets acquired before the previous year, the written down value would be the actual cost to the assessee less the aggregate of all deductions actually allowed in respect of depreciation. For this purpose, any depreciation carried forward is deemed to be depreciation actually allowed [Section 43(6)(c)(i) read with Explanation 3].

(iii) In case of any block of assets: The written down value of any block of assets shall be worked out as under in accordance with section 43(6)(c):

1. W.D.V. of the block of assets in immediately preceding previous year
2. Less: Depreciation actually allowed in respect of that block of assets in said preceding previous year

Opening balance as on 1ˢᵗ April of the current P.Y. xxx

Increased by

Actual cost of assets acquired during the previous year, not being on account of acquisition of goodwill of a business or profession

Reduced by

Total (1) - (2) + (3) xxx
Money receivable in respect of any asset falling within the block which is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed during that previous year together with scrap value. However, such amount cannot exceed the amount in (4).
In case of slump sale, actual cost of the asset (-) amount of depreciation that would have been allowable to the assessee for any assessment year as if the asset was the only asset in the block. However, such amount of reduction cannot exceed the WDV.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.222 INCOME TAX LAW

(7) W.D.V at the end of the year (on which depreciation is allowable) [(4) – (5) – (6)]

(8) Depreciation at the prescribed rate (Rate of Depreciation × WDV arrived at in (7) above) xxx

(iv) Depreciation provided in the books of account deemed to be depreciation actually allowed: Section 32(1)(ii) provides that depreciation shall be allowed at the prescribed percentage on the written down value (WDV) of any block of assets. Section 43(6)(b) provides that written down value in the case of assets acquired before the previous year means the actual cost to the assessee less all depreciation actually allowed to him under the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Persons who were exempt from tax were not required to compute their income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. However, when the exemption is withdrawn subsequently, such persons became liable to income-tax and hence, were required to compute their income for income-tax purposes. In this regard, a question arises as to the basis on which depreciation is to be allowed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 in respect of assets acquired during the years when the person was exempt from tax.

Explanation 6 to section 43(6) provides that,-

- (a) the actual cost of an asset has to be adjusted by the amount attributable to the revaluation of such asset, if any, in the books of account;
- (b) the total amount of depreciation on such asset provided in the books of account of the assessee in respect of such previous year or years preceding the previous year relevant to the assessment year under consideration shall be deemed to be the depreciation actually allowed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes of section 43(6);
- (c) the depreciation actually allowed as above has to be adjusted by the amount of depreciation attributable to such revaluation.

(v) Composite Income: Explanation 7 provides that in cases of ‘composite income’, for the purpose of computing written down value of assets acquired before the previous year, the total amount of depreciation shall be computed as if the entire composite income of the assessee is chargeable under the head “Profits and Gains of
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

business or profession”. The depreciation so computed shall be deemed to have been “actually allowed” to the assessee.

Rule 8 prescribes the taxability of income from the manufacture of tea. Under the said rule, income derived from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by seller shall be computed as if it were income derived from business and 40% of such income shall be deemed to be income liable to tax.

Example: If the turnover is, say, ` 20 lakh, the depreciation ` 1 lakh and other expenses ` 4 lakh, then the income would be ` 15 lakh. Business income would be ` 6 lakh (being 40% of ` 15 lakh). In this case, ` 1 lakh, being the amount of depreciation would be deemed to have been actually allowed. Accordingly, the WDV is required to be computed by deducting the full depreciation attributable to composite income i.e., ` 1 lakh.

# (vi) Cases where the Written Down Value reduced to nil:

The written down value of any block of assets, may be reduced to nil for any of the following reasons:

- (a) The moneys receivable by the assessee in regard to the assets sold or otherwise transferred during the previous year together with the amount of scrap value may exceed the written down value at the beginning of the year as increased by the actual cost of any new asset acquired, or
- (b) All the assets in the relevant block may be transferred during the year.

# (7) Carry forward and set off of depreciation [Section 32(2)]

Section 32(2) provides for carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation. Where, in any previous year the profits or gains chargeable are not sufficient to give full effect to the depreciation allowance, the unabsorbed depreciation shall be added to the depreciation allowance for the following previous year and shall be deemed to be part of that allowance. If no depreciation allowance is available for that previous year, the unabsorbed depreciation of the earlier previous year shall become the depreciation allowance of that year. The effect of this provision is that the unabsorbed depreciation shall be carried forward indefinitely till it is fully set off.

In a case where the assessee is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC and there is a depreciation allowance in respect of a block of asset from an earlier assessment year attributable to additional depreciation.
# 3.224 INCOME TAX LAW

u/s 32(1)(iia), which has not been given full effect to prior to A.Y. 2024-25 and which is not allowed to be set-off in the A.Y.2024-25, corresponding adjustment shall be made to the WDV of such block of assets as on 1.4.2023 in the prescribed manner i.e., the WDV as on 1.4.2023 will be increased by the unabsorbed additional depreciation not allowed to be set-off.

Example: Let us consider the case of Mr. X, who carries on business of manufacturing of steel. He has unabsorbed depreciation as on 1.4.2023, which includes amount attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) of P.Y.2022-23 or any earlier previous year in respect of block of plant and machinery. If he is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC for P.Y.2023-24 relevant to A.Y.2024-25, the amount so attributable to additional depreciation of earlier years remaining unabsorbed as on 1.4.2023 would not be eligible for set-off against current year income. Accordingly, the WDV of the block as on 1.4.2023 has to be increased by the said amount not allowed to be set-off.

# Order of set-off

In the order of set-off of losses under different heads of income, effect shall first be given to business losses and then to unabsorbed depreciation.

The provisions in effect are as follows:

- Since the unabsorbed depreciation forms part of the current year’s depreciation, it can be set off against any other head of income except “Salaries”.
- The unabsorbed depreciation can be carried forward for indefinite number of previous years.
- Set off will be allowed even if the same business to which it relates is no longer in existence in the year in which the set off takes place.

Current depreciation to be deducted first - The Supreme Court, in CIT v. Mother India Refrigeration (P.) Ltd. [1985] 23 Taxman 8, has categorically held that current depreciation must be deducted first before deducting the unabsorbed carried forward business losses of the earlier years in giving set off while computing the total income of any particular year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# ORDER OF SET-OFF

Current Year
Brought forward
Unabsorbed depreciation
Business Loss
# ILLUSTRATION 3

A newly qualified Chartered Accountant Mr. Dhaval, commenced practice and has acquired the following assets in his office during F.Y. 2023-24 at the cost shown against each item. Calculate the amount of depreciation that can be claimed from his professional income for A.Y.2024-25. Assume that all the assets were purchased by way of account payee cheque.

|Sl. No.|Description|Date of acquisition|Date when put to use|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Computer including computer software|27 Sept., 23|1 Oct., 23|35,000|
|2.|Computer UPS|2 Oct., 23|8 Oct., 23|8,500|
|3.|Computer printer|1 Oct., 23|1 Oct., 23|12,500|
|4.|Books (other than annual publications are of ` 12,000)|1 Apr., 23|1 Apr., 23|13,000|
|5.|Office furniture (Acquired from a practicing C.A.)|1 Apr., 23|1 Apr., 23|3,00,000|
|6.|Laptop|26 Sep., 23|8 Oct., 23|43,000|

# SOLUTION

# Computation of depreciation allowable for A.Y.2024-25

|Asset|Rate|Depreciation (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Block 1 Furniture [See working note below]|10%|30,000|
|Block 2 Plant (Computer including computer software, Computer UPS, Laptop, Printers and Books) [See working note below]|40%|34,500|
|Total depreciation allowable| |64,500|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.226 INCOME TAX LAW

# Working Note:

# Computation of depreciation

|Block of Assets|Rate of depreciation|Put to use for more than 180 days|Depreciation Amount|
|---|---|---|---|
|Block 1: Furniture|10%|₹ 3,00,000 @ 10%|30,000|
|Block 2: Plant|40%|(a) Computer including computer software|14,000|
|20%|(b) Computer UPS|1,700| |
|40%|(c) Computer Printer|5,000| |
|20%|(d) Laptop|8,600| |
|40%|(e) Books|5,200| |
|Total Depreciation| |34,500| |

Note - Where an asset is acquired by the assessee during the previous year and is put to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of less than 180 days, the deduction on account of depreciation would be restricted to 50% of the prescribed rate. In this case, since Mr. Dhaval commenced his practice in the P.Y. 2023-24 and acquired the assets during the same year, the restriction of depreciation to 50% of the prescribed rate would apply to those assets which have been put to use for less than 180 days in that year, namely, laptop and computer UPS.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. Gamma, a proprietor started a business of manufacture of tyres and tubes for motor vehicles on 1.1.2023. The manufacturing unit was set up on 1.5.2023. He commenced his manufacturing operations on 1.6.2023. The total cost of the plant and machinery installed in the unit is ₹ 120 crore. The said plant and machinery included second hand plant and machinery bought for ₹ 20 crore and new plant and machinery for scientific research relating to the business of the assessee acquired at a cost of ₹ 15 crore.

Compute the amount of depreciation allowable under section 32 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in respect of the assessment year 2024-25. Assume that all the assets were purchased by way of account payee cheque and Mr. Gamma has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.227 SOLUTION

# Computation of depreciation allowable for the A.Y. 2024-25 in the hands of Mr. Gamma

|Particulars|` in crore|
|---|---|
|Total cost of plant and machinery|120.00|
|Less: Used for Scientific Research (Note 1)|15.00|
| |105.00|
|Normal Depreciation at 15% on ` 105 crore|15.75|
|Additional Depreciation:| |
|Cost of plant and machinery|120.00|
|Less: Second-hand plant and machinery (Note 2)|20.00|
|Plant and machinery used for scientific research, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowable as deduction u/s 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)(ia) (Note 2)|15.00|
| |35.00|
| |85.00|
|Additional Depreciation at 20%|17.00|
|Depreciation allowable for A.Y.2024-25|32.75|

# Notes:

1. As per section 35(2)(iv), no depreciation shall be allowed in respect of plant and machinery purchased for scientific research relating to assessee’s business, since deduction is allowable under section 35 in respect of such capital expenditure.
2. Mr. Gamma is entitled to additional depreciation since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in the case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after 31.3.2005 by an assessee engaged in, inter alia, the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing, at the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.228 INCOME TAX LAW

However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter alia, –

1. any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee, was used either within or outside India by any other person;
2. any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profit and gains of business or profession” of any one previous year.

In view of the above provisions, additional depreciation cannot be claimed in respect of -

1. Second hand plant and machinery;
2. New plant and machinery purchased for scientific research relating to assessee’s business in respect of which the whole of the capital expenditure can be claimed as deduction under section 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)(ia) & (iv).

# (8) Building, machinery, plant and furniture not exclusively used for business purpose [Section 38(2)]

Where any building, plant and machinery, furniture is not exclusively used for the purposes of business or profession, the deduction on account of expenses on account of current repairs to the premises, insurance premium of the premises, current repairs and insurance premium of machinery, plant and furniture and depreciation in respect of these assets shall be restricted to a fair proportionate part thereof, which the Assessing Officer may determine having regard to the user of such asset for the purposes of the business or profession.

# (9) Balancing Charge

Section 41(2) provides for the manner of calculation of the amount which shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the business of the previous year in which the monies payable for the building, machinery, plant or furniture on which depreciation has been claimed under section 32(1)(i), i.e. in the case of power undertakings, is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed. The balancing charge will be the amount by which the moneys payable in respect of such building, machinery, plant or furniture, together with the amount of scrap value, if any, exceeds the written down value.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

However, the amount of balancing charge should not exceed the difference between the actual cost and the WDV. The tax shall be levied in the year in which the moneys payable become due.

The Explanation below section 41(2) makes it clear that where the moneys payable in respect of the building, machinery, plant or furniture referred to in section 41(2) becomes due in a previous year in which the business, for the purpose of which the building, machinery, plant or furniture was being used, is no longer in existence, these provisions will apply as if the business is in existence in that previous year.

# (iv) Expenditure on Scientific Research [Section 35]

This section allows a deduction in respect of any expenditure on scientific research (activities for extension of knowledge in the fields of natural or applied science, including agriculture, animal husbandry or fisheries) incurred in relation to the business of the assessee or contribution by the assessee for scientific research or social science or statistical research. However, it does include expenditure incurred in acquisition of rights in or arising out of scientific research.

The deduction allowable under this section is depicted in the diagram below –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.230 INCOME TAX LAW

# Revenue Expenditure

|100% of the expenditure incurred| | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| | |Capital Expenditure|(other than expenditure on land)|
|Incurred by assessee on scientific research related to business| | | |
|Approved Indian company for scientific research|100% of sum paid| | |
|Notified approved University/ college/ Research association/ other institution for social science or statistical research| | | |
|Expenditure on Scientific research Paid to Notified approved University/ college/ Research association/ other institution for scientific research|100% of sum paid| | |
|Approved National Laboratory/university/IIT/ specified person for scientific research undertaken under an approved programme| | | |

# (I) Incurred by assessee:

# (i) Revenue Expenditure:

Any revenue expenditure incurred by the assessee on scientific research related to his business would be allowed as deduction in the year in which it was incurred. Expenditure incurred within 3 years immediately preceding the commencement of the business on payment of salary to research personnel engaged in scientific research related to his business carried on by the taxpayer or on purchase of material inputs for such scientific research will be allowed as deduction in the year in which the business is commenced.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.231

The deduction will be limited to the amount certified by the prescribed authority [Section 35(1)(i)].

# (ii) Capital Expenditure:

Any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related to the business carried on by the assessee would be deductible in full in the previous year in which it is incurred [Section 35(1)(iv)].

# (a) Capital expenditure prior to commencement of business

The Explanation 1 to section 35(2)(ia) specifically provides that where any capital expenditure has been incurred prior to the commencement of the business, the aggregate of the expenditure so incurred within the three years immediately preceding the commencement of the business shall be deemed to have been incurred in the previous year in which the business is commenced and will rank for deduction as expenditure for scientific research incurred during the previous year.

Expenditure on land disallowed: No deduction will be allowed in respect of capital expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land whether the land is acquired as such or as part of any property.

# (b) Carry forward of unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research

Capital expenditure incurred on scientific research which cannot be absorbed by the business profits of the relevant previous year can be carried forward to the immediately succeeding previous year and shall be treated as the allowance for that year. In effect, this means that there is no time bar on the period of carry forward. It shall be accordingly allowable for that previous year against any head of income other than salaries [Section 35(4)].

# (c) Depreciation not admissible

Section 35(2)(iv) clarifies that no depreciation will be admissible on any capital asset represented by expenditure which has been allowed as a deduction under section 35 whether in the year in which deduction under section 35 was allowed or in any other previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.232 INCOME TAX LAW

(d) Sale of asset representing expenditure of capital nature on scientific research

Section 41, inter alia, seeks to tax the profits arising on the sale of an asset representing expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research.

Where the asset representing expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research is sold without having been used for other purposes, the provisions of section 41(3) would be attracted. If the proceeds of sale together with the total amount of the deductions made under section 35(1)(iv) exceed the amount of capital expenditure, the excess or the amount of deduction so made, whichever is less, will be charged to tax as income of the business of the previous year in which the sale took place.

In simple words, since amount of deduction under section 35(1)(iv) is equal to the amount of expenditure, lower of amount of sale proceeds or deduction allowed under section 35(1)(iv) will be the charged to tax as income of the business in the previous year in which the asset is sold.

Deduction under section 35(1)(i) and 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2) would be available to an assessee under both regimes, subject to fulfillment of stipulated conditions.

(II) Amount contributed or paid to:

- (i) Notified approved research association, university, college or other institution: A sum equal to any amount paid to –
- - a research association which has as its object the undertaking of scientific research or
- to a university, college or other institution to be used for scientific research

provided that such university, college, institution or association is approved for this purpose and notified by the Central Government. [Section 35(1)(ii)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.233

Deduction u/s 35(1)(ii) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (ii) Approved Indian company for scientific research:

A sum equal to any amount paid to a company to be used by it for scientific research [Section 35(1)(iia)]

However, such deduction would be available only if:

- the company is registered in India and
- has as its main object the scientific research and development.

Further, it should be approved by the prescribed authority and should fulfill the other prescribed conditions.

Deduction u/s 35(1)(iia) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (iii) Approved notified research association, university, college or other institution:

A sum equal to any amount paid to

- a research association which has as its object the undertaking of research in social science or statistical research or
- to a university, college or other institution to be used for research in a social science or statistical research

provided that they are approved for this purpose and notified by the Central Government [Section 35(1)(iii)].

Further, it has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor) is entitled on account of payment of any sum to a research association or university or college or other institution for scientific research or research in a social science or statistical research or to a company for scientific research, shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn.

Deduction u/s 35(1)(iii) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.234 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) Sum paid to National Laboratory, etc. [Section 35(2AA)]: Section 35(2AA) provides that any sum paid by an assessee to a National Laboratory or University or Indian Institute of Technology or a specified person for carrying out approved programmes of scientific research approved by the prescribed authority will be eligible for deduction of the amount so paid.

No other deduction under the Act: No contribution which qualifies for deduction under this clause will be entitled to deduction under any other provision of the Act.

It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee is entitled on account of payment of any sum by him to an approved National Laboratory, University, Indian Institute of Technology or a specified person for the approved programme shall not be denied to the donor-assessee merely on the ground that after payment of such sum by him, the approval granted to any of the aforesaid donee-entities or the programme has been withdrawn.

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Specified person|A person who is approved by the prescribed authority|

Deduction u/s 35(2AA) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Mr. A, furnishes the following particulars for the P.Y.2023-24. Compute the deduction allowable under section 35 for A.Y.2024-25, while computing his income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, if.

(i) he is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

(ii) he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|1. Amount paid to notified approved Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, for scientific research|1,00,000|
|2. Amount paid to IIT, Delhi for an approved scientific research programme|2,50,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3. Amount paid to X Ltd., a company registered in India which has 4,00,000 as its main object scientific research and development, as is approved by the prescribed authority

4. Expenditure incurred on in-house scientific research and development facility as approved by the prescribed authority related to his business

- (a) Revenue expenditure on scientific research 3,00,000
- (b) Capital expenditure (including cost of acquisition of land ` 5,00,000) on scientific research 7,50,000

# SOLUTION

(i) If Mr. A is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

# Computation of deduction under section 35 for the A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|Section|Allowability|Amount of deduction (`)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Payment for scientific research|Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore|1,00,000|35(1)(ii)|Not allowable under default tax regime|Nil|
|IIT, Delhi|2,50,000|35(2AA)|tax regime|Nil| |
|X Ltd.|4,00,000|35(1)(iia)| |Nil| |
|Expenditure incurred on in-house research and development facility|Revenue expenditure|3,00,000|35(1)(i)|Allowable|3,00,000|
|Capital expenditure|2,50,000|35(1)(iv)|under default read with tax regime|2,50,000| |
|(excluding cost of acquisition of land ` 5,00,000)| | | | | |

Deduction allowable under section 35 5,50,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.236 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) If Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

# Computation of deduction under section 35 for the A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|Section|% of deduction|Amount of deduction (`)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Payment for scientific research|1,00,000|35(1)(ii)|100%|1,00,000|
|Indian Institute of Science|1,00,000|35(1)(ii)|100%|1,00,000|
|IIT, Delhi|2,50,000|35(2AA)|100%|2,50,000|
|X Ltd.|4,00,000|35(1)(iia)|100%|4,00,000|
|Expenditure incurred on in-house research and development facility| | | | |
|Revenue expenditure|3,00,000|35(1)(i)|100%|3,00,000|
|Capital expenditure|2,50,000|35(1)(iv)|100%|2,50,000|
|(excluding cost of acquisition of land| |read with 35(2)(ia)| | |
|` 5,00,000)| | | | |
|Deduction allowable under section 35| | | |13,00,000|

# (v) “Investment-linked tax incentives” for specified businesses [Section 35AD]

(1) List of specified businesses: Although there are a plethora of tax incentives available under the Income-tax Act, 1961 they do not fulfill the intended purpose of creating infrastructure since these incentives are linked to profits and consequently, have the effect of diverting profits from the taxable sector to the tax-free sector.

With the specific objective of creating rural infrastructure and environment friendly alternate means for transportation of bulk goods, investment-linked tax incentives have been introduced for specified businesses, namely –

- setting-up and operating ‘cold chain’ facilities for specified products;
- setting-up and operating warehousing facilities for storing agricultural produce;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.237

- laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage facilities being an integral part of such network;
- building and operating a hotel of two-star or above category, anywhere in India;
- building and operating a hospital, anywhere in India, with at least 100 beds for patients;
- developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme for slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or a State Government.
- developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme for affordable housing framed by the Central Government or State Government;
- production of fertilizer in India;
- setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962;
- bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax;
- setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar;
- laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron ore;
- setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing unit, if such unit is notified by the Board in accordance with the prescribed guidelines;
- developing or maintaining and operating or developing, maintaining and operating a new infrastructure facility.

# (2) Deduction for Capital Expenditure:

100% of the capital expenditure incurred during the previous year, wholly and exclusively for the above businesses would be allowed as deduction from the business income to the assessee opting for deduction under section 35AD.

However, expenditure incurred on acquisition of any land, goodwill or financial instrument would not be eligible for deduction.

Further, any expenditure in respect of which payment or aggregate of payment made to a person of an amount exceeding ` 10,000 in a day.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.238 INCOME TAX LAW

otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode would not be eligible for deduction. The prescribed electronic modes include credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020]

In case of an individual/HUF/AoP/BoI carrying on specified business, deduction u/s 35AD would be available only if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). If such assessee is paying concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC, deduction u/s 35AD would not be available.

A company would not be eligible for deduction under section 35AD, if it opts for the special provisions of section 115BAA/115BAB.

# (3) Expenditure prior to commencement of operation:

Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purpose of specified business prior to commencement of operation would be allowed as deduction during the previous year in which the assessee commences operation of his specified business. The amount incurred prior to commencement should be capitalized in the books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its operations.

# (4) Conditions to be fulfilled:

For claiming deduction under section 35AD, the specified business should fulfill the following conditions –

1. it should not be set up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence;
2. it should not be set up by the transfer to the specified business of machinery or plant previously used for any purpose; In order to satisfy this condition, the total value of the plant or machinery so transferred should not exceed 20% of the value of the total plant or machinery used in such specified business. For the purpose of this condition, machinery or plant would not be regarded as previously used if it had been used outside India by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

any person other than the assessee provided the following conditions are satisfied:

1. such plant or machinery was not, at any time prior to the date of its installation by the assessee, used in India;
2. the plant or machinery was imported into India from a foreign Country; and
3. no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such plant or machinery has been allowed to any person at any time prior to the date of installation by the assessee.

(5) No deduction under section 10AA or Chapter VI-A under the heading “C - Deductions in respect of certain incomes”: Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in respect of the specified business for any assessment year, no deduction under the provisions of Chapter VI-A under the heading “C - Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or section 10AA is permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or any other assessment year.

Correspondingly, section 80A has been amended to provide that where a deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes” is claimed and allowed in respect of the profits of such specified business for any assessment year, no deduction under section 35AD is permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or any other assessment year.

In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction under section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business, he cannot claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C - Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or section 10AA for the same or any other year and vice versa.

(6) No deduction allowable under the Act in respect of expenditure for which deduction allowed under this section: The assessee cannot claim deduction in respect of such expenditure incurred for specified business under any other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the current year or under this section for any other year, if the deduction has been claimed or opted by him and allowed to him under section 35AD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.240 INCOME TAX LAW

# (7) Date of Commencement of specified businesses:

|S. No.|Specified business|Date of commencement of operations|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Laying and operating a cross country natural gas pipeline network for distribution, including storage facilities being an integral part of such network|on or after 1st April, 2007|
|2.|(a) building and operating anywhere in India, a hotel of two-star or above category as specified by the Central Government (b) building and operating a hospital with at least 100 beds for patients (c) notified scheme for slum redevelopment or rehabilitation housing projects|on or after 1st April, 2010|
|3.|(a) notified scheme for affordable housing projects and (b) production of fertilizer in a new plant or in a newly installed capacity in an existing plant|on or after 1st April, 2011|
|4.|(a) setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962, (b) bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax and (c) setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar|on or after 1st April, 2012|
|5.|(a) laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron ore or (b) setting up and operating a semi-conductor wafer fabrication manufacturing unit|on or after 1st April, 2014|
|6.|developing or operating and maintaining or developing, operating and maintaining, any infrastructure facility|on or after 1st April, 2017|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

7. In any other case, namely, setting and operating - on or after

- (a) “cold-chain” facilities for specified products 1st April, 2009
- (b) warehousing facilities for storing agricultural produce

# (8) Meaning of certain terms

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Cold chain facility|A chain of facilities for storage or transportation of agricultural and forest produce, meat and meat products, poultry, marine and dairy products, products of horticulture, floriculture and apiculture and processed food items under scientifically controlled conditions including refrigeration and other facilities necessary for the preservation of such produce.|
|Associated person|In relation to the assessee means a person—|
| |(i) who participates directly or indirectly or through one or more intermediaries in the management or control or capital of the assessee;|
| |(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not less than 26% of the voting power in the capital of the assessee;|
| |(iii) who appoints more than half of the Board of directors or members of the governing board, or one or more executive directors or executive members of the governing board of the assessee; or|
| |(iv) who guarantees not less than 10% of the total borrowings of the assessee.|
|Infrastructure facility|(i) A road including toll road, a bridge or a rail system.|
| |(ii) A highway project including housing or other activities being an integral part of the highway project.|
| |(iii) A water supply project, water treatment system, irrigation project, sanitation and sewerage system or solid waste management system.|
| |(iv) A port, airport, inland waterway, inland port or navigational channel in the sea.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.242 INCOME TAX LAW

(9) Set-off or carry forward and set-off of loss from specified business:

The loss of an assessee claiming deduction u/s 35AD in respect of a specified business can be set-off against the profit of another specified business u/s 73A, irrespective of whether the latter is eligible for deduction u/s 35AD.

Example: A assessee, exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), can therefore, set-off the losses of a hospital or hotel which begins to operate after 1st April, 2010 and which is eligible for deduction section 35AD, against the profits of the existing business of operating a hospital (with at least 100 beds for patients) or a hotel (of two-star or above category), even if the latter is not eligible for deduction under section 35AD.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Mr. A commenced operations of the businesses of setting up a warehousing facility for storage of food grains, sugar and edible oil on 1.4.2023. He incurred capital expenditure of ` 80 lakh, ` 60 lakh and ` 50 lakh, respectively, on purchase of land and building during the period January, 2023 to March, 2023 exclusively for the above businesses, and capitalized the same in its books of account as on 1st April, 2023. The cost of land included in the above figures is ` 50 lakh, ` 40 lakh and ` 30 lakh, respectively. During the P.Y. 2023-24, he incurred capital expenditure of ` 20 lakh, ` 15 lakh & ` 10 lakh, respectively, for extension/reconstruction of the building purchased and used exclusively for the above businesses.

Compute the income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” for the A.Y. 2024-25 and the loss to be carried forward, assuming that Mr. A is exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and has fulfilled all the conditions specified under section 35AD and wants to claim deduction under section 35AD and has not claimed any deduction under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”.

The profits from the business of setting up a warehousing facility for storage of food grains, sugar and edible oil (before claiming deduction under section 35AD and section 32) for the A.Y. 2024-25 is ` 16 lakhs, ` 14 lakhs and ` 31 lakhs, respectively. Also, assume in respect of expenditure incurred, the payments are made by account payee cheque or use of ECS through bank account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# SOLUTION

# Computation of profits and gains of business or profession for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|` (in lakhs)|
|---|---|
|Profit from business of setting up of warehouse for storage of edible oil (before providing for depreciation under section 32)|31|
|Less: Depreciation under section 32| |
|10% of ` 30 lakh, being (` 50 lakh – ` 30 lakh + ` 10 lakh)|3|
|Income chargeable under “Profits and gains from business or profession”|28|

# Computation of income/loss from specified business under section 35AD

|Particulars|Food|Sugar|Total| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(A) Profits from the specified business of setting up a warehousing facility (before providing deduction u/s 35AD)|16|14|30| |
|Less: Deduction under section 35AD| | | | |
|(B) Capital expenditure incurred prior to 1.4.2023 (i.e., prior to commencement of business) and capitalized in the books of account as on 1.4.2023 (excluding the expenditure incurred on acquisition of land) = ` 30 lakh (` 80 lakh – ` 50 lakh) and ` 20 lakh (` 60 lakh – ` 40 lakh)|30|20|50| |
|(C) Capital expenditure incurred during the P.Y. 2023-24|20|15|35| |
|(D) Total capital expenditure (B + C)|50|35|85| |
|(E) Deduction under section 35AD|100% of capital expenditure (food grains/ sugar)|50|35|85|
|Total deduction u/s 35AD for A.Y.2024-25|50|35|85| |
|(F) Loss from the specified business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility (after providing for deduction under section 35AD) to be carried forward as per section 73A (A-E)|(34)|(21)|(55)| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.244 INCOME TAX LAW

Notes:

1. Deduction of 100% of the capital expenditure is available under section 35AD for A.Y.2024-25 in respect of specified business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar and setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of agricultural produce where operations are commenced on or after 1.4.2012 or on or after 1.4.2009, respectively.
2. However, since setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of edible oils is not a specified business, Mr. A is not eligible for deduction under section 35AD in respect of capital expenditure incurred in respect of such business.
3. Mr. A can, however, claim depreciation @10% under section 32 in respect of the capital expenditure incurred on buildings. It is presumed that the buildings were put to use for more than 180 days during the P.Y.2023-24.
4. Loss from a specified business can be set-off only against profits from another specified business. Therefore, the loss of ₹ 55 lakh from the specified businesses of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of food grains and sugar cannot be set-off against the profits of ₹ 28 lakh from the business of setting and operating a warehousing facility for storage of edible oils, since the same is not a specified business. Such loss can, however, be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of the same or any other specified business.

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. Suraj, a proprietor, commenced operations of the business of a new three-star hotel in Madurai, Tamil Nadu on 1.4.2023. He incurred capital expenditure of ₹ 50 lakh during the period January, 2023 to March, 2023 exclusively for the above business, and capitalized the same in his books of account as on 1st April, 2023. Further, during the P.Y. 2023-24, he incurred capital expenditure of ₹ 2 crore (out of which ₹ 1.50 crore was for acquisition of land) exclusively for the above business.

Compute the income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” for the A.Y.2024-25, assuming that he has fulfilled all the conditions specified under section 35AD and opted for claiming deduction under section 35AD; and he has not claimed any deduction under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

The profits from the business of running this hotel (before claiming deduction under section 35AD) for the A.Y.2024-25 is ₹ 25 lakhs. Assume that he also has another

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

existing business of running a four-star hotel in Coimbatore, which commenced operations fifteen years back, the profits from which are ` 120 lakhs for the A.Y.2024-25. Also, assume that payments for capital expenditure were made by net banking.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of profits and gains of business or profession for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits from the specified business of new hotel in Madurai|25 lakh|
|(before providing deduction under section 35AD)| |
|Less: Deduction under section 35AD| |
|Capital expenditure incurred during the P.Y.2023-24 (excluding the expenditure incurred on acquisition of land)|200 lakh – 150 lakh|
| |50 lakh|
|Capital expenditure incurred prior to 1.4.2023 (i.e., prior to commencement of business) and capitalized in the books of account as on 1.4.2023|50 lakh|
|Total deduction under section 35AD for A.Y.2024-25|100 lakh|
|Loss from the specified business of new hotel in Madurai|(75 lakh)|
|Profit from the existing business of running a hotel in Coimbatore|120 lakh|
|Net profit from business after set-off of loss of specified business against profits of another specified business under section 73A|45 lakh|

# (10) Other conditions contained under section 35AD

|S. No.|Particulars|Condition|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Audit of accounts|The deduction shall be allowed to the assessee only if the accounts of the assessee for the relevant P.Y. have been audited by a chartered accountant and the assessee furnishes the audit report in the prescribed form, duly signed and verified by such accountant.|
|2.|Asset to be used for specified business for eight years|Section 35AD(7A) provides that any asset in respect of which a deduction is claimed and allowed u/s 35AD shall be used only for the specified business for a period of eight years beginning with the previous year in which such asset is acquired or constructed.|
|3.|(i) Asset demolished|If any asset on which a deduction u/s 35AD has been claimed and allowed, is demolished, destroyed,|

# 3.246 INCOME TAX LAW

destroyed, discarded or transferred, the sum received or receivable for the same is chargeable to tax u/s 28(vii). This does not take into account a case where asset on which deduction u/s 35AD has been claimed is used for any purpose other than the specified business by way of a mode other than that specified above.

(ii) Asset used for any other purpose other than the specified business during 8 years beginning with the previous year in which such asset is acquired, the total amount of deduction so claimed and allowed in any previous year(s) in respect of such asset, as reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable in accordance with the provisions of section 32 as if no deduction had been allowed u/s 35AD, shall be deemed to be income of the assessee chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” of the previous year in which the asset is so used.

In such a case, as per the proviso to Explanation 13 to Section 43(1), the actual cost of such asset for the assessee shall be the actual cost as reduced by amount of depreciation would have been allowable had the asset been used for the purpose of business since the date of its acquisition.

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Mr. Arnav is a proprietor having two units – Unit A carries on specified business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar; Unit B carries on non-specified business of operating a warehousing facility for storage of edible oil. Unit A commenced operations on 1.4.2022 and it claimed deduction of ` 100 lacs incurred on purchase of two buildings for ` 50 lacs each (for operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar) under section 35AD for A.Y.2023-24. However, in February, 2024, Unit A transferred one of its buildings to Unit B.

Examine the tax implications of such transfer in the hands of Mr. Arnav.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.247 SOLUTION

Since the capital asset, in respect of which deduction of ` 50 lacs was claimed u/s 35AD, has been transferred by Unit A carrying on specified business to Unit B carrying on non-specified business in the P.Y.2023-24, the deeming provision u/s 35AD(7B) is attracted during the A.Y.2024-25.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Deduction allowed u/s 35AD for A.Y.2023-24|50,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation allowable u/s 32 for A.Y.2023-24 [10% of ` 50 lacs]|5,00,000|
|Deemed income under section 35AD(7B)|45,00,000|

Mr. Arnav, however, by virtue of proviso to Explanation 13 to section 43(1), can claim depreciation u/s 32 on the building in Unit B for A.Y.2024-25. For the purpose of claiming depreciation on building in Unit B, the actual cost of the building would be:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Actual cost to the assessee|50,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation allowable u/s 32 for A.Y.2023-24 [10% of ` 50 lacs]|5,00,000|
|Actual cost in the hands of Mr. Arnav in respect of building in its Unit B|45,00,000|

# (vi) Amortisation of Preliminary Expenses [Section 35D]

1. Nature of expenditure: Section 35D provides for the amortisation of preliminary expenses incurred by Indian companies and other resident non-corporate taxpayers for the establishment of business concerns or the expansion of the business of existing concerns.
2. Applicable: This section applies

- (a) only to Indian companies and resident non-corporate assessees;
- (b) in the case of new companies to expenses incurred before the commencement of the business;
- (c) in the case of extension of an existing undertaking to expenses incurred till the extension is completed, i.e., in the case of the setting up of a new unit - expenses incurred till the new unit commences production or operation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.248 INCOME TAX LAW

(3) Amount eligible for deduction: Such preliminary expenditure incurred shall be amortised over a period of 5 years. In other words, 1/5th of such expenditure is allowable as a deduction for each of the five successive previous years beginning with the previous year in which the business commences or, the previous year in which the extension of the undertaking is completed or the new unit commences production or operation, as the case may be.

(4) Eligible expenses - The following expenditure are eligible for amortisation:

1. Expenditure in connection with–
1. the preparation of feasibility report
2. the preparation of project report;
3. conducting market survey or any other survey necessary for the business of the assessee;
4. engineering services relating to the assessee’s business;

The assessee has to furnish a statement containing the particulars of above expenditure within prescribed period to the prescribed income-tax authority in the prescribed form and manner.
2. legal charges for drafting any agreement between the assessee and any other person for any purpose relating to the setting up to conduct the business of assessee.
3. Where the assessee is a company, in addition to the above, expenditure incurred –
1. by way of legal charges for drafting the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the company;
2. on printing the Memorandum and Articles of Association;
3. by way of fees for registering the company under the Companies Act; 19566,
4. in connection with the issue, for public subscription, of the shares in or debentures of the company, being underwriting commission, brokerage and charges for drafting, printing and advertisement of the prospectus;

6 Now Companies Act, 2013

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

(iv) Such other items of expenditure (not being expenditure qualifying for any allowance or deduction under any other provision of the Act) as may be prescribed by the Board for the purpose of amortisation. However, the Board, so far, has not prescribed any specific item of expense as qualifying for amortisation under this clause.

# (5) Overall Limits

The maximum aggregate amount of the qualifying expenses that can be amortised has been fixed at 5% of the cost of the project or in the case of an Indian company, at the option of the company, 5% of the capital employed in the business of the company, whichever is higher. The excess, if any, of the qualifying expenses shall be ignored.

|•5% of the cost of|Amount of|•5% of cost of|Whichever|
|---|---|---|---|
|the project|deduction|project|higher|
|•1/5th of qualifying limit for each of the five successive years| | | |
|In case of resident non-corporate assessees| | | |
|In case of Indian companies| | | |

# (6) Meaning of certain terms:

|Terms|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Cost of (i) Expenses incurred before the commencement of business:|the actual cost of the fixed assets, being land, buildings, leaseholds, plant, machinery, furniture, fittings, railway sidings (including expenditure on the development of land, buildings) which are shown in the books of the assessee as on the last day of the previous year in which the business of the assessee commences;|
|(ii) Expenses incurred for extension of the business or setting up of a new unit:|the cost of the fixed assets being land, buildings, leaseholds, plant, machinery, furniture, fittings, and railway sidings (including expenditure on the development of land and buildings) which are shown in the books of the assessee as on the|

# 3.250 INCOME TAX LAW

last day of the previous year in which the extension of the undertaking is completed or, as the case may be, the new unit commences production or operation, in so far as such assets have been acquired or developed in connection with the extension of the undertaking or the setting up of the new unit.

# Capital employed

(i) In the case of new company: the aggregate of the issued share capital, debentures and long-term borrowings as on the last day of the previous year in which the business of the company commences;

(ii) in the case of extension of the business or the setting up of a new unit: the aggregate of the issued share capital, debentures, and long-term borrowings as on the last day of the previous year in which the extension of the undertaking is completed or, as the case may be, the unit commences production or operation in so far as such capital, debentures and long-term borrowings have been issued or obtained in connection with the extension of the undertaking or the setting up of the new undertaking or the setting up of the new unit of the company.

# (7) Audit of accounts:

In cases where the assessee is a person other than a company or a co-operative society, the deduction would be allowable only if the accounts of the assessee for the year or years in which the expenditure is incurred have been audited by a Chartered Accountant before the date specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due date for furnishing return of income u/s 139(1); and the assessee has, by that date, furnished for the first year in which the deduction is claimed, the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by the auditor and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.

|Particulars|Due date of filing of return|Specified Date|
|---|---|---|
|Assessees (other than a company)|31ˢᵗ October of the relevant A.Y.|30ᵗʰ September of the relevant A.Y.|
| |For A.Y.2024-25, on or before 31ˢᵗ October, 2024|For A.Y.2024-25, on or before 30ᵗʰ September, 2024|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.251

# (8) No other deduction under any provision of the Act:

It has been clarified that in case where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any assessment year in respect of any item of expenditure, the expenditure in respect of which deduction is so allowed shall not qualify for deduction under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

# (vii) Amortisation of expenditure incurred under voluntary retirement scheme [Section 35DDA]:

1. Nature of expenditure: This section applies to an assessee who has incurred expenditure in any previous year in the form of payment to any employee in connection with his voluntary retirement, in accordance with any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement.
2. Amount of deduction: The amount of deduction allowable is one-fifth of the amount paid for that previous year, and the balance in four equal installments in the four immediately succeeding previous years.
3. No deduction under any other provision of the Act: No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the above expenditure under any other provision of the Act.

# (viii) Other Deductions [Section 36]

This section authorises deduction of certain specific expenses. The items of expenditure and the conditions under which such expenditures are deductible are:

1. Insurance premia paid [Section 36(1)(i)]: If insurance policy has been taken out against risk, damage or destruction of the stock or stores used for the business or profession, the premia paid is deductible. But the premium in respect of any insurance undertaken for any other purpose is not allowable under the clause.
2. Premia paid by employer for health insurance of employees [Section 36(1)(ib)]: This clause seeks to allow a deduction to an employer in respect of premia paid by him by any mode of payment other than cash to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of his employees in accordance with a scheme framed by.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.252 INCOME TAX LAW

(i) the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the Central Government; or

(ii) any other insurer and approved by the IRDA.

# (3) Bonus and Commission [Section 36(1)(ii)]

These are deductible in full provided the sum paid to the employees as bonus or commission shall not be payable to them as profits or dividends if it had not been paid as bonus or commission.

It is a provision intended to safeguard against a private company or an association escaping tax by distributing a part of its profits by way of bonus amongst the members, or employees of their own concern instead of distributing the money as dividends or profits.

# (4) Interest on borrowed capital [Section 36(1)(iii)]

Deduction of interest is allowed in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of business or profession in the computation of income under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".

Capital may be borrowed for several purposes like for acquiring a capital asset, or to pay off a trading debt or loss etc. The scope of the expression ‘for the purposes of business’ is very wide. Capital may be borrowed in the course of the existing business as well as for acquiring assets for extension of existing business.

As per proviso to section 36(1)(iii), deduction in respect of any amount of interest paid, in respect of capital borrowed for acquisition of new asset (whether capitalised in the books of account or not) for any period beginning from the date on which the capital was borrowed for acquisition of the asset till the date on which such asset was first put to use shall not be allowed.

Explanation 8 to section 43(1) clarifies that interest relatable to a period after the asset is first put to use cannot be capitalised. Interest in respect of capital borrowed for any period from the date of borrowing to the date on which the asset was first put to use should, therefore, be capitalised.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Interest on borrowing for acquisition of new capital asset for business or profession

|Interest from the date of borrowing|Interest for the period after such asset is first put to use|
|---|---|
|Includible in the actual cost of the asset [to be capitalised]|Allowable as deduction while computing business income|

# (5) Discount on Zero Coupon Bonds (ZCBs) [Section 36(1)(iiia)]

Section 36(1)(iiia) provides deduction for the discount on ZCB on pro rata basis having regard to the period of life of the bond to be calculated in the manner prescribed.

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Discount|Difference of the amount received or receivable by an infrastructure capital company/ infrastructure capital fund/ public sector company/ scheduled bank on issue of the bond and the amount payable by such company or fund or bank on maturity or redemption of the bond.|
|Period of life of the bond|The period commencing from the date of issue of the bond and ending on the date of the maturity or redemption.|

# (6) Contributions to provident and other funds [Section 36(1)(iv) and (v)]

Contribution to the employees’ recognised provident fund/approved superannuation fund is allowable subject to the limits laid down for the purpose of recognizing the provident fund or approving superannuation fund.

Contribution to an approved gratuity fund is allowable subject to the condition that the gratuity fund should be for exclusive benefit of the employees under an irrevocable trust.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.254 INCOME TAX LAW

(7) Employer’s contribution to the account of the employee under a Pension Scheme referred to in section 80CCD [Section 36(1)(iva)]

1. Section 36(1)(iva) to provide that the employer’s contribution to the account of an employee under a Pension Scheme as referred to in section 80CCD would be allowed as deduction while computing business income.
2. However, deduction would be restricted to 10% of salary of the employee in the previous year.
3. Salary, for this purpose, includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.

(8) Amount received by an assessee-employer as contribution from his employees towards their welfare fund to be allowed only if such amount is credited on or before due date under the relevant Act, Rule etc. – Section 36(1)(va) and section 57(ia) provide that deduction in respect of any sum received by the taxpayer as contribution from his employees towards any welfare fund of such employees will be allowed only if such sum is credited by the taxpayer to the employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before the due date.

Due date: The date by which the assessee is required as an employer to credit such contribution to the employee’s account in the relevant fund under the provisions of any law on term of contract of service or otherwise.

As per the Employees Provident Funds Scheme, 1952, the amounts under consideration in respect of wages of the employees for any particular month shall be paid within 15 days of the close of every month.

Note - It is clarified that the provisions of section 43B regarding allowability of certain expenditure in a previous year only on actual payment basis on or before due date of filing of return of income for relevant assessment year, does not apply and would deemed never to be applied on employee’s contribution received by employer towards any welfare fund of such employee. In effect, the extended time up to due date of filing of return for is not available for credit of employees contribution towards any welfare fund received by the employer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.255

# (9) Bad debts [Section 36(1)(vii) and section 36(2)]

These can be deducted subject to the following conditions:

1. The debts or loans should be in respect of a business which was carried on by the assessee during the relevant previous year.
2. The debt should have been taken into account in computing the income of the assessee of the previous year in which such debt is written off or of an earlier previous year or should represent money lent by the assessee in the ordinary course of his business of banking or money lending.

# I. Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of the assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs7 to be allowed as deduction in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable [Section 36(1)(vii)]

1. Under section 36(1)(vii), deduction is allowed in respect of the amount of any bad debt or part thereof which is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee for the previous year.
2. Therefore, write off in the books of account is an essential condition for claim of bad debts under section 36(1)(vii).
3. Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of the assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs to be allowed as deduction in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable.

If a debt, which has not been recognized in the books of account as per the requirement of the accounting standards but has been taken into account in the computation of income as per the notified ICDSs, has become irrecoverable, it can still be claimed as bad debt under section 36(1)(vii) since it shall be deemed that the debt has been written off as irrecoverable in the books of account by virtue of the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii). This is because some ICDSs require recognition of income at an earlier point of time (prior to the point of time such income is recognised in the books of account). Consequently, if the whole or part of such income recognised at an

7 Income Computation Disclosure Standards (ICDSs) will be discussed at Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.256 INCOME TAX LAW

Earlier point of time for tax purposes becomes irrecoverable, it can be claimed as bad debts on account of the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii).

Where the amount of such debt or part thereof has been taken into account in computing the income of the assessee (on the basis of ICDSs without recording the same in the accounts) of the previous year in which such debt has become irrecoverable or of an earlier previous year, such debt or part thereof shall be allowed in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable and it shall be deemed that such debt or part thereof has been written off as irrecoverable in the accounts.

# II. Deduction of differential amount of debts due as bad debts in the year of recovery, to the extent of deficiency in recovery

If, on the final settlement, the amount recovered in respect of any debt, where deduction had already been allowed, falls short of the difference between the debt due and the amount of debt allowed, the deficiency can be claimed as a deduction from the income of the previous year in which the ultimate recovery out of the debt is made.

It is permissible for the Assessing Officer to allow deduction in respect of a bad debt or any part thereof in the assessment of a particular year and subsequently to allow the balance of the amount, if any, in the year in which the ultimate recovery is made, that is to say, when the final result of the process of recovery comes to be known.

Recovery of a bad debt subsequently [Section 41(4)] - If a deduction has been allowed in respect of a bad debt under section 36, and subsequently the amount recovered in respect of such debt is more than the amount due after the allowance had been made, the excess shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession and will be chargeable as income of the previous year in which it is recovered.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.257

whether or not the business or profession in respect of which the deduction has been allowed is in existence at the time.

# (10) Expenses on family planning by a company [Section 36(1)(ix)]

Any expenditure of revenue nature bona fide incurred by a company for the purpose of promoting family planning amongst its employees will be allowed as a deduction in computing the company’s business income:

- Where the expenditure is of a capital nature, one-fifth of such expenditure will be deducted in the previous year in which it was incurred and in each of the four immediately succeeding previous years.
- This deduction is allowable only to companies and not to other assessees.
- The assessee would be entitled to carry forward and set off the unabsorbed part of the allowance in the same way as unabsorbed depreciation.

The capital expenditure on promoting family planning will be treated in the same way as capital expenditure for scientific research for purposes of dealing with the profit or loss on the sale or transfer of the asset including a transfer on amalgamation.

An individual carrying on business or profession will not be allowed deduction of expenses incurred on promoting family planning amongst its employees.

# (11) Deduction of securities transaction tax paid [Section 36(1)(xv)]

The amount of securities transaction tax paid by the assessee during the year in respect of taxable securities transactions entered into in the course of business shall be allowed as deduction under section 36 subject to the condition that such income from taxable securities transactions is included under the head ‘Profits and gains of business or profession’.

Thus, securities transaction tax paid would be allowed as a deduction like any other business expenditure.

# (12) Deduction for commodities transaction tax paid in respect of taxable commodities transactions [Section 36(1)(xvi)]

(a) Section 36(1)(xvi) provides that an amount equal to the CTT paid by the assessee in respect of the taxable commodities transactions
# 3.258 INCOME TAX LAW

entered into in the course of his business during the previous year shall be allowable as deduction, if the income arising from such taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

(b) A ‘taxable commodities transaction’ means a transaction of sale of commodity derivatives or sale of commodity derivatives based on prices or indices of prices of commodity derivatives or option on commodity derivatives or option in goods in respect of commodities, other than agricultural commodities, traded in recognised stock exchange.

(c) A “commodity derivative” means –

- (1) A contract for delivery of goods which is not a ready delivery contract
- (2) A contract for differences which derives its value from prices or indices of prices -

# (ix) Residuary Expenses [Section 37]

1. Revenue expenditure incurred for purposes of carrying on the business, profession or vocation - This is a residuary section under which only business expenditure is allowable but not the business losses, e.g., those arising out of embezzlement, theft, destruction of assets, misappropriation by employees etc. The deduction is limited only to the amount actually expended and does not extend to a reserve created against a contingent liability.
2. Conditions for allowance: The following conditions should be fulfilled in order that a particular item of expenditure may be deductible under this section:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

(b) It should have been incurred by the assessee in the accounting year.

(c) It should be in respect of a business carried on by the assessee the profits of which are being computed and assessed.

(d) It must have been incurred after the business was set up.

(e) It should not be in the nature of any personal expenses of the assessee.

(f) It should have been laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of such business.

(g) It should not be in the nature of capital expenditure.

(h) The expenditure should not have been incurred by the assessee for any purpose which is an offence or is prohibited by law.

This section is thus limited in scope. It does not permit an assessee to make all deductions which a prudent trader would make in ascertaining his own profit. It might be observed that the section requires that the expenditure should be wholly and exclusively laid out for purpose of the business but not that it should have been necessarily laid out for such purpose. Therefore, expenses wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose of trade are, subject to the fulfilment of other conditions, allowed under this section even though the outlay is unnecessary.

# Expenditure incurred on Keyman insurance policy:

CBDT Circular no. 762/1998 dated 18.02.1998 clarifies that the premium paid on the Keyman Insurance Policy is allowable as business expenditure.

The Punjab and Haryana High Court held that, “the Keyman Insurance Policy when obtained to secure the life of a partner to safeguard the firm against a disruption of the business is equally for the benefit of the partnership business which may be effected as a result of premature death of a partner. Thus, the premium on the Keyman Insurance Policy of partner of the firm is wholly and exclusively for the purpose of business and is allowable as business expenditure”.

The CBDT accepted the view of the High Court, accordingly, vide Circular no. 38/2016 has clarified that, in case of a firm, premium paid by the firm on the Keyman Insurance Policy of a partner, to safeguard the firm against a disruption of the business, is an admissible expenditure under section 37.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.260 INCOME TAX LAW

(4) Explanation 1 to section 37(1) - This Explanation provides that any expenditure incurred by the assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law shall not be allowed as a deduction or allowance.

(5) Explanation 3 to section 37(1) – It is clarified that the expression “expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law” in (4) above would include and would be deemed to have always included the expenditure incurred by an assessee, -

- (i) for any purpose which is an offence under any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India or which is prohibited by any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India; or
- (ii) to provide any benefit or perquisite, in whatever form, to a person, whether or not carrying on a business or exercising a profession, and acceptance of such benefit or perquisite by such person is in violation of any law or rule or regulation or guidelines, as the case may be, for the time being in force, governing the conduct of such person; or
- (iii) to compound an offence under any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India.

For eg: expenses incurred in providing freebies to medical practitioner by pharmaceutical and allied health sector industry are in violation of the provisions of Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations. Hence, such expenditure is considered to be expenses prohibited by the law and not allowed in the hands of such pharmaceutical or allied health sector industry or other assessee which has provided aforesaid freebies.

(6) Disallowance of CSR expenditure [Explanation 2 to Section 37(1)]

- (i) Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Schedule VII thereto and Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility) Rules, 2014 are the special provisions under the company law regime imposing mandatory CSR obligations in respect of companies having net worth/turnover/net profit exceeding specified threshold limits. Such companies have to spend a specified percentage of their average net profits on CSR activities.
- (ii) Under section 37(1), only expenditure, not covered under sections 30 to 36, and incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

business is allowed as a deduction while computing taxable business income. The issue under consideration is whether CSR expenditure is allowable as deduction under section 37.

(iii) It has been clarified that for the purposes of section 37(1), any expenditure incurred by an assessee on the activities relating to CSR referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall not be deemed to have been incurred for the purpose of business and hence, shall not be allowed as deduction under section 37.

(iv) The rationale behind the disallowance is that CSR expenditure, being an application of income, is not incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of carrying on business.

(v) However, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance (No.2) Bill, 2014 clarifies that CSR expenditure, which is of the nature described in sections 30 to 36, shall be allowed as deduction under those sections subject to fulfillment of conditions, if any, specified therein.

(7) Advertisements in souvenirs of political parties: Section 37(2B) disallows any deduction on account of advertisement expenses representing contributions made by any person carrying on business or profession in computing the profits and gains of the business or profession. It has specifically been provided that this provision for disallowance would apply notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 37(1).

In other words, the expenditure representing contribution for political purposes would become disallowable even in those cases where the expenditure is otherwise incurred by the assessee in his character as a trader and the amount is wholly and exclusively incurred for the purpose of the business.

Accordingly, a taxpayer would not be entitled to any deduction in respect of expenses incurred by him on advertisement in any souvenir, brochure, tract or the like published by any political party, whether it is registered with the Election Commission of India or not.

# 3.7 INADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTION 40]

By dividing the assessees into distinct groups, this section places absolute restraint on the deductibility of certain expenses as follows:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.262 INCOME TAX LAW

In the case of any assessee, the following expenses are not deductible:

1. Section 40(a)(i)

Any interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum chargeable under this Act, which is payable, -

- (a) outside India;
- (b) in India to a non-resident non-corporate or to a foreign company, on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XVIIB and such tax has not been deducted or, after deduction, has not been paid on or before the due date of filing of return specified under section 139(1).

It is also provided that where in respect of any such sum, where tax has been deducted in any subsequent year, or has been deducted in the previous year but paid after the due date of filing of return under section 139(1), such sum shall be allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the previous year in which such tax has been paid.

In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by reason that such payee –

- (i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
- (ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
- (iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income, and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed,

it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum on the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.

Since the date of furnishing the return of income by the payee is taken to be the date on which the payer has deducted tax at source and paid the same, such expenditure/payment in respect of which the payer has failed to deduct tax at source shall be disallowed under section 40(a)(i) in the year in which the said expenditure is incurred. However, such expenditure will be allowed as deduction in the subsequent year in which the return of income is furnished by the payee, since tax is deemed to have been deducted and paid by the payer in that year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.263

# (2) Section 40(a)(ia)

Section 40(a)(ia) provides that 30% of any sum payable to a resident, on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XVII-B, shall be disallowed if –

1. such tax has not been deducted; or
2. such tax, after deduction, has not been paid on or before the due date specified in section 139(1).

If in respect of such sum, tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or has been deducted during the previous year but paid after the due date specified in section 139(1), 30% of such sum shall be allowed as deduction in computing the income of the previous year in which such tax has been paid.

In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by reason that such payee –

1. has furnished his return of income under section 139;
2. has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
3. has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,

and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed, it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum.

The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.

Since the date of furnishing the return of income by the payee is taken to be the date on which the payer has deducted tax at source and paid the same, 30% of such expenditure/payment in respect of which the payer has failed to deduct tax at source shall be disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) in the year in which the said expenditure is incurred. However, 30% of such expenditure will be allowed as deduction in the subsequent year in which the return of income is furnished by the payee, since tax is deemed to have been deducted and paid by the payer in that year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.264 INCOME TAX LAW

Example: Tax on royalty paid to Mr. A, a resident, has been deducted during the previous year 2023-24, the same has to be paid by 31st July/ 31st October, 2024, as the case may be. Otherwise, 30% of royalty paid would be disallowed in computing the income for A.Y.2024-25. If in respect of such royalty, tax deducted during the P.Y.2023-24 has been paid after 31st July/31st October, 2024, 30% of such royalty, disallowed in A.Y.2024-25, would be allowed as deduction in the year of payment, i.e., A.Y.2025-26.

Note - Students are advised to read Chapter 7 on “Advance tax, tax deduction at source and tax collection at source” before solving this illustration.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Delta Ltd. credited the following amounts to the account of resident payees in the month of March, 2024 without deduction of tax at source. What would be the consequence of non-deduction of tax at source by Delta Ltd. on these amounts during the financial year 2023-24, assuming that the resident payees in all the cases mentioned below, have not paid the tax, if any, which was required to be deducted by Delta Ltd.?

|Particulars|Amount in `|
|---|---|
|(1) Salary to its employee, Mr. X (credited and paid in March, 2024)|12,00,000|
|(2) Directors’ remuneration (credited in March, 2024 and paid in April, 2024)|28,000|

Would your answer change if Delta Ltd. has deducted tax on directors’ remuneration in April, 2024 at the time of payment and remitted the same in July, 2024?

# SOLUTION

Non-deduction of tax at source on any sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible at source as per the provisions of Chapter XVII-B would attract disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia).

Therefore, non-deduction of tax at source on any sum paid by way of salary on which tax is deductible u/s 192 or any sum credited or paid by way of directors’ remuneration on which tax is deductible u/s 194J, would attract disallowance@30% u/s 40(a)(ia). Whereas in case of salary, tax has to be deducted u/s 192 at the time of payment, in case of directors’ remuneration, tax has to be deducted at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the payee or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier. Therefore, in both the cases i.e., salary and directors’ remuneration, the provisions of tax deduction at source apply accordingly.
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

directors’ remuneration, tax is deductible in the P.Y.2023-24, since salary was paid in that year and directors’ remuneration was credited in that year. Therefore, the amount to be disallowed u/s 40(a)(ia) while computing business income for A.Y.2024-25 is as follows –

|Particulars|Amount paid in `|Disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) @30%|
|---|---|---|
|(1) Salary|12,00,000|3,60,000|
|(2) Directors’ remuneration|28,000|8,400|
|Disallowance under section 40(a)(ia)|Disallowance under section 40(a)(ia)|3,68,400|

If the tax is deducted on directors’ remuneration in the next year i.e., P.Y.2024-25 at the time of payment and remitted to the Government, the amount of ` 8,400 would be allowed as deduction while computing the business income of A.Y. 2025-26.

Disallowance of any sum paid to a resident at any time during the previous year without deduction of tax under section 40(a)(ia) [Circular No.10/2013, dated 16.12.2013]

There have been conflicting interpretations by judicial authorities regarding the applicability of provisions of section 40(a)(ia), with regard to the amount not deductible in computing the income chargeable under the head ‘Profits and gains of business or profession’. Some court rulings have held that the provisions of disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) apply only to the amount which remained payable at the end of the relevant financial year and would not be invoked to disallow the amount which had actually been paid during the previous year without deduction of tax at source.

Departmental View: The CBDT’s view is that the provisions of section 40(a)(ia) would cover not only the amounts which are payable as on 31st March of a previous year but also amounts which are payable at any time during the year. The statutory provisions are amply clear and in the context of section 40(a)(ia), the term "payable" would include "amounts which are paid during the previous year".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.266 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 10

During the financial year 2023-24, the following payments/expenditure were made/incurred by Mr. Raja, a resident individual (whose turnover during the year ended 31.3.2023 was ` 99 lacs):

1. Interest of ` 45,000 was paid to Rehman & Co., a resident partnership firm, without deduction of tax at source;
2. ` 10,00,000 was paid as salary to a resident individual without deduction of tax at source;
3. Commission of ` 16,000 was paid to Mr. Vidyasagar, a resident, on 2.7.2023 without deduction of tax at source.

Briefly discuss whether any disallowance arises under the provisions of section 40(a)(ia) assuming that the payees in all the cases mentioned above, have not paid the tax, if any, which was required to be deducted by Mr. Raja?

# SOLUTION

Disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is attracted where the assessee fails to deduct tax at source as is required under the Act, or having deducted tax at source, fails to remit the same to the credit of the Central Government within the stipulated time limit.

1. The obligation to deduct tax at source from interest paid to a resident arises u/s 194A in the case of an individual, whose total turnover in the immediately preceding P.Y., i.e., P.Y.2022-23 exceeds ` 1 crore. Thus, in present case, since the turnover of the assessee is less than ` 1 crore, he is not liable to deduct tax at source. Hence, disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) is not attracted in this case.
2. The disallowance of 30% of the sums payable under section 40(a)(ia) would be attracted in respect of all sums on which tax is deductible under Chapter XVII-B. Section 192, which requires deduction of tax at source from salary paid, is covered under Chapter XVII-B. The obligation to deduct tax at source under section 192 arises, in the hands all assessee-employer even if the turnover amount does not exceed ` 1 crore in the immediately preceding previous year. Therefore, in the present case, the disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) is attracted for failure to deduct tax at source under section 192 from salary payment. However, only 30% of the amount of salary paid without deduction of tax at source would be disallowed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.267

(iii) The obligation to deduct tax at source under section 194H from commission paid in excess of ` 15,000 to a resident arises in the case of an individual, whose total turnover in the immediately preceding previous year, i.e., P.Y.2022-23 exceeds ` 1 crore. Thus, in present case, since the turnover of the assessee is less than ` 1 crore, he is not liable to deduct tax at source u/s 194H. Mr. Raja is not required to deduct tax at source u/s 194M also since the aggregate of such commission to Mr. Vidyasagar does not exceed ` 50 lakh during the P.Y. 2023-24. Therefore, disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) is not attracted in this case.

# (3) Section 40(a)(ii)

Any sum paid on account of any rate or tax levied on profits on the basis of or in proportion to the profits and gains of any business or profession. It is clarified that the term “tax” would include and would be deemed to have always included any surcharge or cess on such tax. Hence, tax including surcharge and cess would be disallowed while computing business income [Explanation 3 to section 40(a)(ii)].

# (4) Section 40(a)(iii)

Any sum which is chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’ if it is payable outside India or to a non-resident and if the tax has not been paid thereon nor deducted therefrom under Chapter XVII-B.

# (5) Section 40(a)(iv)

Any contribution to a provident fund or the fund established for the benefit of employees of the assessee, unless the assessee has made effective arrangements to make sure that tax shall be deducted at source from any payments made from the fund which are chargeable to tax under the head ‘Salaries’.

# (6) Section 40(a)(v)

Tax paid on perquisites on behalf of employees is not deductible - In case of an employee, deriving income in the nature of perquisites (other than monetary payments), the amount of tax on such income paid by his employer is exempt from tax in the hands of that employee. Correspondingly, such payment is not allowed as deduction from the income of the employer. Thus, the payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites by an

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.268 INCOME TAX LAW

Employer on behalf of employee will be exempt from tax in the hands of employee but will not be allowable as deduction in the hands of the employer.

In the case of any firm assessable as such or a limited liability partnership (LLP), the following amounts shall not be deducted in computing the business income:

# Section 40(b)

1. Remuneration to non-working partner - Any salary, bonus, commission, remuneration by whatever name called, to any partner who is not a working partner. (In the following discussion, the term ‘remuneration’ is applied to denote payments in the nature of salary, bonus, commission);
2. Remuneration to a working partner not authorized by deed - Any remuneration paid to the working partner or interest to any partner which is not authorised by or which is inconsistent with the terms of the partnership deed;
3. Remuneration to a working partner or interest to a partner authorized by deed but relates to an earlier period - It is possible that the current partnership deed may authorise payments of remuneration to any working partner or interest to any partner for a period which is prior to the date of the current partnership deed. The approval by the current partnership deed might have been necessitated due to the fact that such payment was not authorised by or was inconsistent with the earlier partnership deed. Such payments of remuneration or interest will also be disallowed. However, it should be noted that the current partnership deed cannot authorise any payment which relates to a period prior to the date of earlier partnership deed.

Next, by virtue of a further restriction contained in section 40(b)(iii), such remuneration paid to the working partners will be allowed as deduction to the firm from the date of such partnership deed and not for any period prior thereto.

Example: If a firm incorporates the clause relating to payment of remuneration to the working partners, by executing an appropriate deed, say, on July 1, 2023 but effective from April 1, 2023, the firm would get deduction for the remuneration paid to its working partners from July 1, 2023 onwards, but not for the period from April 1 to June 30. It will not be possible to give retrospective effect to oral agreements entered into vis a vis such remuneration prior to putting the same in a written partnership deed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.269

1. Interest to any partner in excess of 12% p.a.- Any interest payment authorised by the partnership deed falling after the date of such deed to the extent such interest exceeds 12% simple interest p.a.
2. Remuneration to a working partner in excess of prescribed limits - Any remuneration paid to a working partner, authorised by a partnership deed and falling after the date of the deed in excess of the following limits:

|Book Profit|Quantum of deduction|
|---|---|
|On the first ` 3 lakh of book profit or in case of loss|` 1,50,000 or 90% of book profit, whichever is higher|
|On the balance of book profit|60% of book profit|

Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Book Profit|The net profit as shown in the profit and loss account for the relevant previous year computed in accordance with the provisions for computing income from profits and gains [Explanation 3 to section 40(b)]. The above amount should be increased by the remuneration paid or payable to all the partners of the firm if the same has been deducted while computing the net profit.|
|Working partner|An individual who is actively engaged in conducting the affairs of the business or profession of the firm of which he is a partner [Explanation 4 to section 40(b)]|

# ILLUSTRATION 11

A firm has paid ` 7,50,000 as remuneration to its partners for the P.Y.2023-24, in accordance with its partnership deed, and it has a book profit of ` 10 lakh. What is the remuneration allowable as deduction?

# SOLUTION

The allowable remuneration calculated as per the limits specified in section 40(b)(v) would be –

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|On first ` 3 lakh of book profit [` 3,00,000 × 90%]|2,70,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.270 INCOME TAX LAW

On balance ` 7 lakh of book profit [` 7,00,000 × 60%] 4,20,000

6,90,000

The excess amount of ` 60,000 (i.e., ` 7,50,000 – ` 6,90,000) would be disallowed as per section 40(b).

# (7) Explanations to section 40(b)

(1) Where an individual is a partner in a firm in a representative capacity:

- (i) interest paid by the firm to such individual otherwise than as partner in a representative capacity shall not be taken into account for the purposes of this clause.
- (ii) interest paid by the firm to such individual as partner in a representative capacity and interest paid by the firm to the person so represented shall be taken into account for the purposes of this clause [Explanation 1 to section 40(b)].

(2) Where an individual is a partner in a firm otherwise than in a representative capacity, interest paid to him by the firm shall not be taken into account if he receives the same on behalf of or for the benefit of any other person [Explanation 2 to section 40(b)].

# ILLUSTRATION 12

Rao & Jain, a partnership firm consisting of two partners, reports a net profit of ` 7,00,000 before deduction of the following items:

- (1) Salary of ` 20,000 each per month payable to two working partners of the firm (as authorized by the deed of partnership).
- (2) Depreciation on plant and machinery under section 32 (computed) ` 1,50,000.
- (3) Interest on capital at 15% per annum (as per the deed of partnership). The amount of capital eligible for interest is ` 5,00,000.

Compute:

- (i) Book-profit of the firm under section 40(b) of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
- (ii) Allowable working partner salary for the A.Y. 2024-25 as per section 40(b).

# SOLUTION

(i) As per Explanation 3 to section 40(b), “book profit” shall mean the net profit as per the profit and loss account for the relevant previous year computed
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

in the manner laid down in Chapter IV-D as increased by the aggregate amount of the remuneration paid or payable to the partners of the firm if the same has been already deducted while computing the net profit. In the present case, the net profit given is before deduction of depreciation on plant and machinery, interest on capital of partners and salary to the working partners. Therefore, the book profit shall be as follows:

# Computation of Book Profit of the firm under section 40(b)

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Net Profit (before deduction of depreciation, salary and interest)|7,00,000| |
|Less: Depreciation under section 32|1,50,000| |
|Interest @ 12% p.a. [being the maximum allowable as per section 40(b)] (` 5,00,000 ×12%)|60,000| |
| |2,10,000| |
|Book Profit|4,90,000| |

(ii) Salary actually paid to working partners = ` 20,000 × 2 × 12 = ` 4,80,000. As per the provisions of section 40(b)(v), the salary paid to the working partners is allowed subject to the following limits -

On the first ` 3,00,000 of book profit or in case of loss is more

On the balance of book profit 60% of the balance book profit

Therefore, the maximum allowable working partners’ salary for the A.Y. 2024-25 in this case would be:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|On the first ` 3,00,000 of book profit [(` 1,50,000 or 90% of ` 3,00,000) whichever is more]|2,70,000|
|On the balance of book profit [60% of (` 4,90,000 - ` 3,00,000)]|1,14,000|
|Maximum allowable partners’ salary|3,84,000|

Hence, allowable working partners’ salary for the A.Y.2024-25 as per the provisions of section 40(b)(v) is ` 3,84,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.272 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3.8 EXPENSES OR PAYMENT NOT DEDUCTIBLE IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES [SECTION 40A]

(i) Payments to relatives and associates

Section 40A(2) provides that where the assessee incurs any expenditure in respect of which a payment has been or is to be made to a specified person [See column (2) of Table below) so much of the expenditure as is considered to be excessive or unreasonable shall be disallowed by the Assessing Officer. While doing so he shall have due regard to:

- (a) the fair market value of the goods, service of facilities for which the payment is made; or
- (b) the legitimate needs of the business or profession carried on by the assessee; or
- (c) the benefit derived by or accruing to the assessee from such a payment.

|Assessee|Specified Person|
|---|---|
|Individual|1. Any relative of the individual assessee|
| |2. Any person who carries on a business or profession, if|
| |• the individual assessee has a substantial interest in the business of that person or|
| |• any relative of the individual assessee has a substantial interest in the business of that person|
|Company, Firm, HUF or AOP|1. Any director of the company, partner of the firm or member of the family or association or any relative of such director, partner or member|
| |2. In case of a company assessee, any individual who has substantial interest in the business or profession of the company or any relative of such individual|
| |3. Any person who carries on a business or profession, in which the Company/ Firm/ HUF/ AOP or director of the company, partner of the firm or member of the family or association or any relative of such director, partner or member has substantial interest in the business of that person.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.273

All assessees

The following are specified persons:

|Person who has substantial interest in the assessee’s business|Other related persons of such person|
|---|---|
|Company/ Firm/ AOP/ HUF|- Any director of such company, partner of such firm or the member of such family or association
- Any relative of such director, partner or member
- Any other company carrying on business or profession in which the first mentioned company has a substantial interest
|
|a director, partner or member|- Company/ Firm/ AOP/ HUF of which he is a director, partner or member
- Any other director/ partner/ member of such Company/Firm/ AOP/ HUF
- Any relative of such director, partner or member
|

Relative, in relation to an “individual”, means the spouse, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant of that individual [Section 2(41)].

# Substantial interest in a business or profession

A person shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a business or profession if -

- in a case where the business or profession is carried on by a company, such person is, at any time during the previous year, the beneficial owner of equity shares carrying not less than 20% of the voting power and
- in any other case, such person is, at any time during the previous year, beneficially entitled to not less than 20% of the profits of such business or profession.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.274 INCOME TAX LAW

# (ii) Payments in excess of ` 10,000 made otherwise than through prescribed modes

According to section 40A(3), where the assessee incurs any expenditure, in respect of which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or by an account payee bank draft or use of electronic system through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes exceeds ` 10,000, such expenditure shall not be allowed as a deduction.

The prescribed electronic modes are credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].

The provision applies to all categories of expenditure involving payments for goods or services which are deductible in computing the taxable income.

Example: If, in respect of an expenditure of ` 32,000 incurred by X Ltd., 4 cash payments of ` 8,000 are made on a particular day to one Mr. Y – one in the morning at 10 a.m., one at 12 noon, one at 3 p.m. and one at 6 p.m., the entire expenditure of ` 32,000 would be disallowed under section 40A(3), since the aggregate of cash payments made during a day to Mr. Y exceeds ` 10,000.

Payments in excess of ` 10,000 made otherwise than through prescribed modes deemed to be the income of the subsequent year, if expenditure has been allowed as deduction in any previous year on due basis:

In case of an assessee following mercantile system of accounting, if an expenditure has been allowed as deduction in any previous year on due basis, and payment has been made in a subsequent year otherwise than by account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay, then the payment so made shall be deemed to be the income of the subsequent year if such payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day exceeds ` 10,000 [Section 40A(3A)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Increased limit of ` 35,000 applicable, where payment is made to transport operator: The limit would be ` 35,000 in case of payment made to transport operators for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, otherwise than through prescribed modes. Therefore, payment or aggregate of payments up to ` 35,000 in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay. In all other cases, the limit would continue to be ` 10,000.

# Cases where disallowances would not be attracted:

1. Loan transactions: It does not apply to loan transactions because advancing of loans or repayments of the principal amount of loan does not constitute an expenditure deductible in computing the taxable income. However, interest payments of amounts exceeding ` 10,000 at a time are required to be made by account payee cheques or drafts or electronic clearing system or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay as interest is a deductible expenditure.
2. Payment made by commission agents: This requirement does not apply to payment made by commission agents for goods received by them for sale on commission or consignment basis because such a payment is not an expenditure deductible in computing the taxable income of the commission agent. For the same reason, this requirement does not apply to advance payment made by the commission agent to the party concerned against supply of goods. However, where commission agent purchases goods on his own account but not on commission basis, the requirement will apply. The provisions regarding payments by account payee cheque or draft or electronic clearing system or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay will apply.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.276 INCOME TAX LAW

(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay apply equally to payments made for goods purchased on credit.

Cases and circumstances in which a payment or aggregate of payments exceeding ten thousand rupees may be made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payee cheque/ account payee bank draft/ use of ECS through a bank account or through such other electronic modes prescribed in Rule 6ABBA [Rule 6DD]:

As per this rule, no disallowance under section 40A(3) shall be made and no payment shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession under section 40A(3A) where a payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay, exceeds ₹10,000 in the cases and circumstances specified hereunder, namely:

1. where the payment is made to
1. the Reserve Bank of India or any banking company;
2. the State Bank of India or any subsidiary bank;
3. any co-operative bank or land mortgage bank;
4. any primary agricultural credit society or any primary credit society;
5. the Life Insurance Corporation of India;
2. where the payment is made to the Government and, under the rules framed by it, such payment is required to be made in legal tender;
3. where the payment is made by
1. any letter of credit arrangements through a bank;
2. a mail or telegraphic transfer through a bank;
3. a book adjustment from any account in a bank to any other account in that or any other bank;
4. a bill of exchange made payable only to a bank;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.277

(d) where the payment is made by way of adjustment against the amount of any liability incurred by the payee for any goods supplied or services rendered by the assessee to such payee;

(e) where the payment is made for the purchase of -

- (i) agricultural or forest produce; or
- (ii) the produce of animal husbandry (including livestock, meat, hides and skins) or dairy or poultry farming; or
- (iii) fish or fish products; or
- (iv) the products of horticulture or apiculture, to the cultivator, grower or producer of such articles, produce or products;

# Notes -

- (i) The expression ‘fish or fish products’ (iii) above would include ‘other marine products such as shrimp, prawn, cuttlefish, squid, crab, lobster etc.’.
- (ii) The 'producers' of fish or fish products for the purpose of Rule 6DD(e) would include, besides the fishermen, any headman of fishermen, who sorts the catch of fish brought by fishermen from the sea, at the sea shore itself and then sells the fish or fish products to traders, exporters etc. However, the above exception will not be available on the payment for the purchase of fish or fish products from a person who is not proved to be a 'producer' of these goods and is only a trader, broker or any other middleman, by whatever name called.

(f) where the payment is made for the purchase of the products manufactured or processed without the aid of power in a cottage industry, to the producer of such products;

(g) where the payment is made in a village or town, which on the date of such payment is not served by any bank, to any person who ordinarily resides, or is carrying on any business, profession or vocation, in any such village or town;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.278 INCOME TAX LAW

(h) where any payment is made to an employee of the assessee or the heir of any such employee, on or in connection with the retirement, retrenchment, resignation, discharge or death of such employee, on account of gratuity, retrenchment compensation or similar terminal benefit and the aggregate of such sums payable to the employee or his heir does not exceed ` 50,000;

(i) where the payment is made by an assessee by way of salary to his employee after deducting the income-tax from salary in accordance with the provisions of section 192 of the Act, and when such employee-

- (i) is temporarily posted for a continuous period of fifteen days or more in a place other than his normal place of duty or on a ship;
- (ii) does not maintain any account in any bank at such place or ship;

(j) where the payment is made by any person to his agent who is required to make payment in cash for goods or services on behalf of such person;

(k) where the payment is made by an authorised dealer or a money changer against purchase of foreign currency or travelers cheques in the normal course of his business.

Note: Where any payment in respect of any expenditure is required to be made by an account payee cheque/account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes in order that such expenditure may not be disallowed as a deduction under section 40A(3), then the payment may be made by such cheque or draft or electronic clearing system or through such other prescribed electronic modes.

No person is allowed to raise, in any suit or other proceeding, a plea based on the ground that the payment was not made or tendered in cash or in any other manner.

This is notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.279

# (iii) Disallowance of provision for gratuity

Section 40A(7) provides that no deduction would be allowable to any taxpayer carrying on any business or profession in respect of any provision (whether called as provision or by any other names) made by him towards the payment of gratuity to his employers on their retirement or on the termination of their employment for any reason.

The reason for this disallowance is that, under section 36(1)(v), deduction is allowable in computing the profits and gains of the business or profession in respect of any sum paid by a taxpayer in his capacity as an employer in the form of contributions made by him to an approved gratuity fund created for the exclusive benefit of his employees under an irrevocable trust. Further, section 37(1) provides that any expenditure other than the expenditure of the nature described in sections 30 to 36 laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business or profession must be allowed as a deduction in computing the taxable income from business.

A reading of these two provisions clearly indicates that the intention of the legislature has always been that the deduction in respect of gratuity be allowable to the employer either in the year in which the gratuity is actually paid or in the year in which contributions to an approved gratuity fund are actually made by employer.

This provision, therefore, makes it clear that any amount claimed by the assessee towards provision for gratuity, by whatever name called would be disallowable in the assessment of employer even if the assessee follows the mercantile system of accounting.

However, no disallowance would be made as per section 40A(7) in the case where any provision is made by the employer for the purpose of payment of sum by way of contribution to an approved gratuity fund during the previous year or for the purpose of making payment of any gratuity that has become payable during the previous year by virtue of the employee’s retirement, death, termination of service etc.

Further, where any provision for gratuity for any reason has been allowed as a deduction to the assessee for any assessment year, any sum paid out of such provision by way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund or by way to gratuity to employee shall not be allowed as deduction to the assessee in the year in which it is paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.280 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iv) Contributions by employers to funds, trust etc. [Section 40A(9)]

This sub-section has been introduced to curb the growing practice amongst employers to claim deductions from taxable profits of the business of contributions made apparently to the welfare of employees from which, however, no genuine benefit flows to the employees.

Accordingly, no deduction will be allowed where the assessee pays in his capacity as an employer, any sum towards setting up or formation of or as contribution to any fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals, society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or other institution for any purpose.

However, where such sum is paid in respect of funds covered by sections 36(1)(iv), 36(1)(iva) and 36(1)(v) or any other law, then, the deduction will not be denied.

# ILLUSTRATION 13

X Ltd. contributes 20% of basic salary to the account of each employee under a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Dearness Allowance is 40% of basic salary and it forms part of pay of the employees.

Compute the amount of deduction allowable under section 36(1)(iva), if the basic salary of the employees aggregate to ` 10 lakh. Would disallowance under section 40A(9) be attracted, and if so, to what extent?

# SOLUTION

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Basic Salary|10,00,000|
|Dearness Allowance@40% of basic salary [DA forms part of pay]|4,00,000|
|Salary for the purpose of section 36(1)(iva) (Basic Salary + DA)|14,00,000|
|Actual contribution (20% of basic salary i.e., 20% of ` 10 lakh)|2,00,000|
|Less: Permissible deduction under section 36(1)(iva) (10% of basic salary plus dearness pay = 10% of ` 14,00,000)|(1,40,000)|
|Excess contribution disallowed under section 40A(9)|60,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.9 PROFITS CHARGEABLE TO TAX

# [SECTION 41]

This section enumerates certain receipts which are deemed to be income under the head “business or profession.” Such receipts would attract charge even if the business from which they arise had ceased to exist prior to the year in which the liability under this section arises. The particulars of such receipts are given below:

1. Remission or cessation of trading liability [Section 41(1)]
Suppose an allowance or deduction has been made in any assessment year in respect of loss, expenditure or trading liability incurred by A. Subsequently, if A has obtained, whether in cash or in any manner whatsoever, any amount in respect of such loss or expenditure of some benefit in respect of such trading liability by way of remission or cessation thereof, the amount obtained by A, or the value of benefit accruing to him shall be taxed as income of that previous year. It does not matter whether the business or profession in respect of which the allowance or deduction has been made is in existence in that year or not.

It is possible that after the above allowance in respect of loss, expenditure, or trading liability has been given to A, he could have been succeeded in his business by another person. In such a case, the successor will be liable to be taxed in respect of any such benefit received by him during a subsequent previous year.

# Successor in business:

1. Where there has been an amalgamation of a company with another company, the successor will be the amalgamated company.
2. Where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another firm, the successor will be the other firm.
3. In any other case, where one person is succeeded by any other person in that business or profession, the other person will be the successor.
4. In case of a demerger, the successor will be the resulting company.

Remission or cessation of a trading liability includes remission or cessation of liability by a unilateral act of the assessee by way of writing off such liability in his accounts.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.282 INCOME TAX LAW

# (ii) Balancing charge, Sale of capital asset used for scientific research, Recovery of a bad debt subsequently etc. [Section 41(2),(3) & (4)]

The provisions of section 41(2) relating to balancing charge, of section 41(3) relating to assets acquired for scientific research and of section 41(4) dealing with recovery of bad debts have been dealt with earlier under the respective items.

# (iii) Brought forward losses of defunct business [Section 41(5)]

In cases where a receipt is deemed to be profit of a business under section 41 relating to a business that had ceased to exist and there is an unabsorbed loss, not being a speculation loss, which arose in that business during the previous year in which it had ceased to exist and which has not been set off, it would be set off against income that is chargeable under this section even after the expiry of 8 years.

# 3.10 CHANGES IN THE RATE OF EXCHANGE OF CURRENCY [SECTION 43A]

(1) The section provides that where an assessee has acquired any asset from a foreign country for the purpose of his business or profession, and due to a change thereafter in the exchange rate of the two currencies involved, there is an increase or decrease in the liability (expressed in Indian rupees) of the assessee at the time of making the payment, towards the whole or part of the cost of the asset or towards repayment of the whole or a part of the money borrowed by him from any person, directly or indirectly, in any foreign currency specifically for the purpose of acquiring the asset along with the interest, if any, the following values may be changed accordingly with respect to the increase or decrease in such liability:

- (i) the actual cost of the asset under section 43(1)
- (ii) the amount of capital expenditure incurred on scientific research under section 35(1)(iv)
- (iii) the amount of capital expenditure incurred by a company for promoting family planning amongst its employees under section 36(1)(ix)
- (iv) the cost of acquisition of a non-depreciable capital asset falling under section 48.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.283

The amount arrived at after making the above adjustment shall be taken as the amount of capital expenditure or the cost of acquisition of the capital asset, as the case may be.

(2) Where the whole or any part of the liability aforesaid is met, not by the assessee, but, directly or indirectly, by any other person or authority, the liability so met shall not be taken into account for the purposes of this section.

(3) Where the assessee has entered into a contract with authorised dealer as defined in section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 for providing him with a specified sum in a foreign currency on or after a stipulated future date at the rate of exchange specified in the contract to enable him to meet the whole or any part of the liability aforesaid, the amount, if any, for adjustment under this section shall be computed with reference to the rate of exchange specified therein.

# 3.11 CERTAIN DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE ONLY ON ACTUAL PAYMENT [SECTION 43B]

The following sums are allowed as deduction only in that previous year in which such sum is actually paid i.e., on actual payment basis.

- (a) Any sum payable by way of tax, duty, cess or fee, by whatever name called, under any law for the time being in force, or
- (b) Any sum payable by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of employees, or
- (c) Bonus or Commission for services rendered payable to employees, or
- (d) Any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing from any public financial institution or a State Financial Corporation or a State Industrial Investment Corporation, or
- (da) Any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing from notified class of non-banking financial companies, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing, or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.284 INCOME TAX LAW

(e) Interest on any loan or advance from a scheduled bank or co-operative bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing, or

(f) Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer in lieu of earned leave of his employee, or

(g) Any sum payable by the assessee to the Indian Railways for use of Railway assets.

For the purpose of claiming deduction of the sums referred to above in clauses (a) to (g) in the relevant previous year in which the expenditure is incurred, the above sums have to be paid by the assessee on or before the due date for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) in respect of the previous year in which the liability to pay such sum was incurred and the evidence of such payment is furnished by the assessee along with such return.

Example: An assessee may collect GST from customers during the month of March, 2024. However, in respect of such collections he may have to discharge the liability only within say 20th April, 2024 under the GST law. The Explanation covers this type of liability also. Consequently, if an assessee following accrual method of accounting has created a provision in respect of such a liability the same is not deductible unless remitted within the due date specified in this section.

Conversion of interest into a loan or borrowing or debenture or any other instrument

Explanation 3C, 3CA & 3D clarifies that if any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any such loan or borrowing or advance referred to in (d), (e) and (f) above, is converted into a loan or borrowing or advance or debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future date, the interest so converted and not “actually paid” shall not be deemed as actual payment, and hence would not be allowed as deduction. The clarificatory explanations only reiterate the rationale that conversion of interest into a loan or borrowing or advance or debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future date does not amount to actual payment.

The manner in which the converted interest will be allowed as deduction has been clarified in Circular No.7/2006 dated 17.7.2006. The unpaid interest, whenever actually paid to the bank or financial institution, will be in the nature of revenue.
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

expenditure deserving deduction in the computation of income. Therefore, irrespective of the nomenclature, the deduction will be allowed in the previous year in which the converted interest is actually paid.

# ILLUSTRATION 14

Hari, an individual, carried on the business of purchase and sale of agricultural commodities like paddy, wheat, etc. He borrowed loans from Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation (APSFC) and Indian Bank and has not paid interest as detailed hereunder:

|(i) Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation (P.Y. 2022-23 & 2023-24)|15,00,000|
|---|---|
|(ii) Indian Bank (P.Y. 2023-24)|30,00,000|
| |45,00,000|

Both APSFC and Indian Bank, while restructuring the loan facilities of Hari during the year 2023-24, converted the above interest payable by Hari to them as a loan repayable in 60 equal installments. During the year ended 31.3.2024, Hari paid 5 installments to APSFC and 3 installments to Indian Bank.

Hari claimed the entire interest of ` 45,00,000 as an expenditure while computing the income from business of purchase and sale of agricultural commodities. Examine whether his claim is valid and if not what is the amount of interest, if any, allowable.

# SOLUTION

According to section 43B, any interest payable on the term loans to specified financial institutions and any interest payable on any loans and advances to, inter alia, scheduled banks shall be allowed only in the year of payment of such interest irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee. Where there is default in the payment of interest by the assessee, such unpaid interest may be converted into loan. Such conversion of unpaid interest into loan shall not be construed as payment of interest for the purpose of section 43B. The amount of unpaid interest so converted as loan shall be allowed as deduction only in the year in which the converted loan is actually paid.

In the given case of Hari, the unpaid interest of ` 15,00,000 due to APSFC and of ` 30,00,000 due to Indian Bank was converted into loan. Such conversion would not amount to payment of interest and would not, therefore, be eligible for deduction in the year of such conversion. Hence, claim of Hari that the entire
# 3.286 INCOME TAX LAW

Interest of ` 45,00,000 is to be allowed as deduction in the year of conversion is not tenable. The deduction shall be allowed only to the extent of repayment made during the financial year. Accordingly, the amount of interest eligible for deduction for the A.Y.2024-25 shall be calculated as follows:

|Interest outstanding|Number of Instalments|Amount per instalment|Instalments paid|Interest allowable (`)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|APSFC|15 lakh|60|25,000|5|1,25,000|
|Indian Bank|30 lakh|60|50,000|3|1,50,000|
| |Total amount eligible for deduction| | | |2,75,000|

# Clarification on non-applicability of section 43B on employee's Contribution to welfare funds [Explanation 5 to section 43B]

As per section 2(24)(x), any sum received by an assessee, being an employer from his employee as contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or any fund set up under Employee’s State Insurance Act, 1948 or any other fund for the welfare of employees would be considered as the income of an employer.

The deduction in respect of above sum will be allowed to the assessee under section 36(1)(va) only if such sum is credited by the assessee to the employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before the due date, being the date specified under the relevant Act, Rule, order or notification issued thereunder.

As per section 43B, any sum payable by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of employees, would be allowable during any P.Y. if the same has been paid on or before the 'due date' applicable in his case for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) in respect of that P.Y.

Explanation 5 clarifies that the provisions of section 43B regarding allowability of certain expenditure in a previous year only on actual payment basis (i.e., payment on or before the due date of filing of return of income for relevant assessment year), does not apply and would deemed never to be applied to employee’s contribution received by employer towards any welfare fund. In effect, clause (b) of section 43B covers only employer’s contribution to provident fund, superannuation fund, gratuity fund or any other fund for welfare of employees, for remittance of which extended time limit up to due date of filing return u/s 139(1) is available; however, it does not include within its scope, employees’ contributions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

contribution to such funds received by the employer, which has to be credited to the employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before the due date specified under the relevant Act, Rule etc. Amount credited after the said due date but on or before the due date under section 139(1) would not be eligible for deduction.

# Section 43B [Clause (h)]

Any sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise beyond the time-limit specified in section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 would be allowed as deduction only in that previous year in which such sum is actually paid.

Section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 mandates payment of goods or services to supplier, being a micro or small enterprises by the buyer on or before the date agreed upon between them in writing i.e., as per the written agreement, which cannot be more than 45 days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance of any goods or services by a buyer from a supplier. If there is no such written agreement, the payment shall be made before the appointed day i.e., within 15 days.

If the sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise is paid as per written agreement (maximum within 45 days) or within 15 days in case of no agreement, the deduction can be claimed on accrual basis if mercantile method of accounting is followed by the assessee.

However, if the sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise is not paid as per written agreement or within 15 days in case of no agreement, the deduction would be allowed in the previous year in which it is actually paid.

# Example:

Mr. A has purchased goods of ` 10,000 from A & Co., a micro enterprise on 1.3.2024. As per the written agreement between them, the payment has to be made by 5.4.2024. Mr. A follows mercantile method of accounting.

# (i) If Mr. A paid the sum on 2.4.2024

Since Mr. A paid the sum on or before 5.4.2024, the deduction would be allowed in P.Y. 2023-24.

# (ii) If Mr. A paid the sum on 20.4.2024

Since Mr. A paid the sum beyond the time limit, the deduction would be allowed in the year of actual payment i.e., P.Y. 2024-25.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.288 INCOME TAX LAW

# Meaning of Micro and Small enterprise

|S. No.|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(1)|Micro Enterprise Investment in Plant and Machinery or Equipment ≤ ` 1 crore AND Turnover ≤ ` 5 crore|
|(2)|Small Enterprise Investment in Plant and Machinery or Equipment ≤ ` 10 crore AND Turnover ≤ ` 50 crore|

Any sum payable means a sum for which the assessee incurred liability in the previous year even though such sum might not have been payable within that year under the relevant law.

# 3.12 STAMP DUTY VALUE OF LAND AND BUILDING TO BE TAKEN AS THE FULL VALUE OF CONSIDERATION IN RESPECT OF TRANSFER, EVEN IF THE SAME ARE HELD BY THE TRANSFEROR AS STOCK-IN-TRADE [SECTION 43CA]

(i) Section 43CA has been inserted as an anti-avoidance measure to provide that where the consideration for the transfer of an asset (other than capital asset), being land or building or both, is less than the stamp duty value, the value so adopted or assessed or assessable (i.e., the stamp duty value) shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration for the purposes of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

computing income under the head “Profits and gains of business of profession”. However, if the stamp duty value does not exceed 110% of the consideration received or accruing, then, such consideration shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration for the purpose of computing profits and gains from transfer of such asset.

(ii) Further, where the date of an agreement fixing the value of consideration for the transfer of the asset and the date of registration of the transfer of the asset are not same, the stamp duty value may be taken as on the date of the agreement for transfer instead of on the date of registration for such transfer, provided at least a part of the consideration has been received by way of an account payee cheque/account payee bank draft or use of ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes on or before the date of the agreement. The prescribed electronic modes include credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].

(iii) The Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of the asset to a valuation officer in the following cases -

1. Where the assessee claims before any Assessing Officer that the value adopted or assessed or assessable by the authority for payment of stamp duty exceeds the fair market value of the property as on the date of transfer and
2. the value so adopted or assessed or assessable by such authority has not been disputed in any appeal or revision or no reference has been made before any other authority, court or High Court.

(iv) Where the value ascertained by the Valuation Officer exceeds the value adopted or assessed or assessable by the Stamp Valuation Authority, the value adopted or assessed or assessable shall be taken as the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.290 INCOME TAX LAW

The term ‘assessable’ has been defined to mean the price which the stamp valuation authority would have, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, adopted or assessed, if it were referred to such authority for the purposes of the payment of stamp duty.

|Date of transfer of land/building|Actual consideration|Stamp duty value (SDV) on the date of agreement|Stamp duty value (SDV) on the date of registration|Full value of consideration|Remark|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1/9/2023|100|120|130|120|As part of the consideration is received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023, Stamp duty value (SDV) on the date of agreement to be adopted as full value of consideration, since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|
|1/9/2023|100|109|130|130|SDV on the date of registration to be adopted as full value of consideration and such SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs. Since part of consideration is received by cash on 1/7/2023.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

on the date of agreement, the SDV on the date of agreement cannot be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration.

# Example:

|31/1/2024|100|109|130|100|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(Actual consideration received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023)|(Actual consideration received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023)|(Actual consideration received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023)|(Actual consideration received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023)|(Actual consideration received by A/c payee cheque on 1/7/2023)|
|would be the full value of consideration, since SDV on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration. SDV on the date of agreement can be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration, since part of the consideration has been received by account payee cheque on the date of agreement.|would be the full value of consideration, since SDV on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration. SDV on the date of agreement can be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration, since part of the consideration has been received by account payee cheque on the date of agreement.|would be the full value of consideration, since SDV on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration. SDV on the date of agreement can be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration, since part of the consideration has been received by account payee cheque on the date of agreement.|would be the full value of consideration, since SDV on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration. SDV on the date of agreement can be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration, since part of the consideration has been received by account payee cheque on the date of agreement.|would be the full value of consideration, since SDV on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration. SDV on the date of agreement can be considered vis-à-vis actual consideration, since part of the consideration has been received by account payee cheque on the date of agreement.|

# Example:

|31/3/2024|100|120|130|130|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(Full amount received in cash on the date of registration)|(Full amount received in cash on the date of registration)|(Full amount received in cash on the date of registration)|(Full amount received in cash on the date of registration)|(Full amount received in cash on the date of registration)|
|would be the full value of consideration since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|would be the full value of consideration since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|would be the full value of consideration since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|would be the full value of consideration since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|would be the full value of consideration since the SDV exceeds 110% of consideration i.e., ` 110 lakhs.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.13 COMPULSORY MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS [SECTION 44AA]

(1) Maintenance of books of account and other documents by notified professions [section 44AA(1)]: This section provides that every person carrying on the legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or any other profession as has been notified by the CBDT in the official gazette must statutorily maintain such books of accounts and other documents as may enable the assessing officer to compute his total income in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Notified professions: The professions notified so far are as the profession of authorised representative; the profession of film artist (actor, camera man, director, music director, art director, editor, singer, lyricist, story writer, screen play writer, dialogue writer and dress designer); the profession of company secretary; and information technology professionals.

Prescribed books of accounts & other documents: The CBDT has been authorised, having due regard to the nature of the business or profession carried on by any class of persons, to prescribe by rules the books of account and other documents including inventories, wherever necessary, to be kept and maintained by the taxpayer, the particulars to be contained therein and the form and manner in which and the place at which they must be kept and maintained.

Rules pertaining to maintenance of books of accounts & other documents: Rule 6F of the Income-tax Rules contains the details relating to the books of account and other documents to be maintained by certain professionals under section 44AA(1).

Prescribed class of persons: As per Rule 6F, every person carrying on legal, medical, engineering, or architectural profession or the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or authorised representative or film artist shall keep and maintain the books of account and other documents specified in Rule 6F(2) in the following cases:

- if his gross receipts exceed ` 1,50,000 in all the 3 years immediately preceding the previous year; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.293

– if, where the profession has been newly set up in the previous year, his gross receipts are likely to exceed ` 1,50,000 in that year.

Professionals whose gross receipts are less than the specified limits given above are also required to maintain books of account but these have not been specified in the Rule.

In other words, they are required to maintain such books of account and other documents as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute the total income in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

# Prescribed books of accounts and other documents [Sub-rule (2) of Rule 6F]:

The following books of account and other documents are required to be maintained.

- (i) a cash book;
- (ii) a journal, if accounts are maintained on mercantile basis;
- (iii) a ledger;
- (iv) Carbon copies of bills and receipts issued by the person whether machine numbered or otherwise serially numbered, in relation to sums exceeding ` 25;
- (v) Original bills and receipts issued to the person in respect of expenditure incurred by the person, or where such bills and receipts are not issued, payment vouchers prepared and signed by the person, provided the amount does not exceed ` 50. Where the cash book contains adequate particulars, the preparation and signing of payment vouchers is not required.

In case of a person carrying on medical profession, he will be required to maintain the following in addition to the list given above:

- (i) a daily case register in Form 3C.
- (ii) an inventory under broad heads of the stock of drugs, medicines and other consumable accessories as on the first and last day of the previous year used for his profession.

Place at which books to be kept and maintained: The books and documents shall be kept and maintained at the place where the person is carrying on the profession, or where there is more than one place, at the principal place of his profession. However, if he maintains separate set of
# 3.294 INCOME TAX LAW

books for each place of his profession, such books and documents may be kept and maintained at the respective places.

Period for which the books of account and other documents are required to be kept and maintained by notified professions: The Central Board of Direct Taxes has also been empowered to prescribe, by rules, the period for which the books of account and other documents are required to be kept and maintained by the taxpayer.

The above books of account and documents shall be kept and maintained for a minimum of 6 years from the end of the relevant assessment year.

# ILLUSTRATION 15

Vinod is a person carrying on profession as film artist. His gross receipts from profession are as under:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Financial year 2020-21|1,15,000|
|Financial year 2021-22|1,80,000|
|Financial year 2022-23|2,10,000|

What is his obligation regarding maintenance of books of accounts for Assessment Year 2024-25 under section 44AA of Income-tax Act, 1961?

# SOLUTION

Section 44AA(1) requires every person carrying on any profession, notified by the Board in the Official Gazette (in addition to the professions already specified therein), to maintain such books of account and other documents as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

As per Rule 6F, a person carrying on a notified profession shall be required to maintain specified books of accounts:

- (i) if his gross receipts in all the three years immediately preceding the relevant previous year has exceeded ` 1,50,000; or
- (ii) if it is a new profession which is setup in the relevant previous year, it is likely to exceed ` 1,50,000 in that previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

In the present case, Vinod is a person carrying on profession as film artist, which is a notified profession. Since his gross receipts have not exceeded ` 1,50,000 in financial year 2020-21, the requirement under section 44AA to compulsorily maintain the prescribed books of account is not applicable to him. Mr. Vinod, however, required to maintain such books of accounts as would enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income.

# (2) Maintenance of books of account and other documents by persons carrying on business or profession [other than notified professions referred to in section 44AA(1)] [Section 44AA(2)]

# I. In case of Individual or HUF:

An Individual or HUF carrying on any business or profession (other than notified professions specified in section 44AA(1)) must maintain such books of account and other documents as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in accordance the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following circumstances:

- (i) Existing business or profession: In cases where the income from the existing business or profession exceeds ` 2,50,000 or the total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business or profession exceed ` 25,00,000 in any one of three years immediately preceding the accounting year; or
- (ii) Newly set up business or profession: In cases where the business or profession is newly set up in any previous year, if his income from business or profession is likely to exceed ` 2,50,000 or his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business or profession are likely to exceed ` 25,00,000 during the previous year.

# II. Person (other than individual or HUF):

Every person (other than individual or HUF) carrying on any business or profession [other than the notified professions referred to in section 44AA(1)] must maintain such books of account and other documents as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in accordance the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following circumstances:
# 3.296 INCOME TAX LAW

(i) Existing business or profession: In cases where the income from the business or profession exceeds ` 1,20,000 or the total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business or profession exceed ` 10,00,000 in any one of three years immediately preceding the accounting year; or

(ii) Newly set up business or profession: In cases where the business or profession is newly set up in any previous year, if his income from business or profession is likely to exceed ` 1,20,000 or his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business or profession are likely to exceed ` 10,00,000 during the previous year;

# III.

Showing lower income as compared to income computed on presumptive basis under section 44AE (or section 44BB or section 44BBB)⁸: Where profits and gains from the business are calculated on a presumptive basis under section 44AE (or section 44BB or section 44BBB) and the assessee has claimed that his income is lower than the profits or gains so deemed to be the profits and gains of his business.

# IV.

Where the provisions of section 44AD(4) are applicable in his case and his income exceeds the basic exemption limit in any previous year: In cases, where an assessee not eligible to claim the benefit of the provisions of section 44AD(1) for five assessment years subsequent to the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the profit has not been declared in accordance with the provisions of 44AD(1) and his income exceeds the basic exemption limit during the previous year.

# (2) Penalty for failure to maintain books of account [Section 271A]

If a person fails to keep and maintain any such books of account and other documents as required by section 44AA in respect of any previous year or to retain such books of account and other documents for the specified period, penalty of ` 25,000 would be leviable under section 271A.

8Section 44BB, 44BBB will be discussed at Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.14 AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF CERTAIN PERSONS CARRYING ON BUSINESS OR PROFESSION [SECTION 44AB]

(i) Requirement of Tax Audit: It is obligatory for the persons mentioned in column (2) of the table below, carrying on business or profession, to get his accounts audited before the “specified date” by a Chartered Accountant, if the conditions mentioned in the corresponding row of column (3) are satisfied.

|(1)|(2)|(3)|
|---|---|---|
|I|In case of a person carrying on business| |
|(a)|In case of a person carrying on business|If his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business > ` 1 crore in the relevant PY|
| |Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB does not apply to a person who declares profits and gains for the previous year on presumptive basis u/s 44AD(1).| |
| |If in case of such person carrying on business -|If his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business > ` 10 crore in the relevant PY|
| |(i) Aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total receipts (incl. receipts for sales, turnover, gross receipts);| |
| |(ii) Aggregate cash payments in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total payments (incl. amount incurred for expenditure)| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.298 INCOME TAX LAW

Note – For this purpose, the payment or receipt, as the case may be, by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, would be deemed to be the payment or receipt, as the case may be, in cash.

# (b) In case of an assessee

If such assessee claims that the profits and gains from business in the relevant P.Y. are lower than the profits and gains computed on a presumptive basis u/s 44AE [i.e., ` 1000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight in case of each heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 for each vehicle, other than heavy goods vehicle, for every month or part of the month for which the vehicle is owned by the assessee].

# (c) In case of an eligible assessee carrying on business

whose total turnover, sales, gross receipts ≤ ` 200 lakhs, and who has opted for section 44AD in any earlier PY (say, P.Y. 2022-23) In case of an eligible assessee carrying on business, whose aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total turnover or gross receipts and whose total turnover, sales, gross receipts ≤ ` 300 lakhs, and who has opted for section 44AD in any earlier PY (say, P.Y. 2022-23).

If he declares profit for any of the five successive PYs (say, P.Y.2023-24) not in accordance with section 44AD (i.e., he declares profits lower than 8% or 6% of total turnover, sales or gross receipts, as the case may be, in that year), then, he cannot opt for section 44AD for five successive PYs after the year of such default (i.e., from P.Y.2024-25 to P.Y.2028-29). For the year of default (i.e., P.Y.2023-24) and five successive previous years (i.e., P.Y.2024-25 to P.Y.2028-29), he has to maintain books of account u/s 44AA and get them audited u/s 44AB, if his income exceeds the basic exemption limit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.299

# II

In case of persons carrying on profession

1. In case of a person carrying on profession

If his gross receipts in profession > ` 50 lakh in the relevant PY.

Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB does not apply to a person who declares profits and gains for the previous year on presumptive basis u/s 44ADA(1).
2. In case of an assessee carrying on a notified profession under section 44AA(1) i.e., legal, medical, engineering, accountancy, architecture, interior decoration, technical consultancy, whose gross receipts ≤ ` 50 lakhs

If such resident assessee claims that the profits and gains from such profession in the relevant PY are lower than the profits and gains computed on a presumptive basis u/s 44ADA (50% of gross receipts) and his income exceeds the basic exemption limit in that PY.
3. In case of an assessee carrying on a notified profession under section 44AA(1) i.e., legal, medical, engineering, accountancy, architecture, interior decoration, technical consultancy, whose aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total gross receipts and whose gross receipts ≤ ` 75 lakhs

# (ii) Audit Report:

The persons mentioned above would have to furnish by the specified date a report of the audit in the prescribed forms. For this purpose, the Board has prescribed under Rule 6G, Forms 3CA/ 3CB/ 3CD containing forms of audit report and particulars to be furnished therewith.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.300 INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Accounts audited under other statutes are considered: In cases where the accounts of a person are required to be audited by or under any other law before the specified date, it will be sufficient if the person gets his accounts audited under such other law before the specified date and also furnish by the said date the report of audit in the prescribed form in addition to the report of audit required under such other law. Thus, for example, the provision regarding compulsory audit does not imply a second or separate audit of accounts of companies whose accounts are already required to be audited under the Companies Act, 2013. The provision only requires that companies should get their accounts audited under the Companies Act, 2013 before the specified date and in addition to the report required to be given by the auditor under the Companies Act, 2013 furnish a report for tax purposes in the form to be prescribed in this behalf by the CBDT.

(iv) Specified date: The expression “specified date” in relation to the accounts of the previous year or years relevant to any assessment year means the date one month prior to the due date for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1). The due date for filing return of income in case of assessees (other than companies) who are required to get their accounts audited is 31st October of the relevant assessment year. Hence, the specified date for tax audit would be 30th September of the relevant assessment year9.

(v) Penalty for failure to get books of account audited: If any person fails to get his accounts audited in respect of any previous year or furnish the audit report by the specified date, penalty of lower of (a) and (b) mentioned below would be leviable on such person –

- (a) ½% of total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in business or of the gross receipts in profession, in such previous year; or
- (b) ` 1,50,000 [Section 271B].

9 Except where the assessee has to file transfer pricing report u/s 92E, for whom the due date u/s 139(1) is 30th November of the A.Y.; and hence, the specified date would be 31st October, in such cases. This is, however, not applicable for Intermediate level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.15 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMPUTING PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS ON PRESUMPTIVE BASIS [SECTIONS 44AD/44ADA/44AE]

|Particulars|Section 44AD|Section 44ADA|Section 44AE|
|---|---|---|---|
|(1) Eligible Assessee|Resident individual, HUF or Partnership firm (but not LLP) engaged in eligible business and who has not claimed deduction under section 10AA or Chapter VIA|Resident individual or Partnership firm (but not LLP) engaged in specified profession u/s 44AA(1), namely, legal, medical, engineering, architectural|An assessee owning not more than 10 goods carriages at any time during the P.Y.|
|Non-applicability of section 44AD in respect of the following persons:|- A person carrying on profession specified u/s 44AA(1);
- A person earning notified income in the nature of commission or brokerage;
- A person carrying on any agency business.
|- A person carrying on profession specified u/s 44AA(1);
- A person earning notified income in the nature of commission or brokerage;
- A person carrying on any agency business.
|- A person carrying on profession specified u/s 44AA(1);
- A person earning notified income in the nature of commission or brokerage;
- A person carrying on any agency business.
|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.302 INCOME TAX LAW

| |Eligible|Any business, other than business referred to in section 44AE, whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|₹ 50 lakhs in the relevant P.Y.| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Any profession specified u/s 44AA(1), whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|Any profession specified u/s 44AA(1), whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|₹ 200 lakhs in the relevant P.Y.| | |
| |Eligible|Any business, other than business referred to in section 44AE, whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|₹ 75 lakhs in the relevant P.Y.| |
|Any profession specified u/s 44AA(1), whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|Any profession specified u/s 44AA(1), whose total gross receipts in the P.Y. ≤|₹ 300 lakhs in the relevant P.Y., if aggregate cash receipts in the relevant P.Y. ≤ 5% of total turnover or gross receipts.| | |
|In effect, if the turnover of business is > ₹ 200 lakhs ≤ ₹ 300 lakhs, the benefit of section 44AD can be availed only if aggregate cash receipts in relevant P.Y. ≤ 5% of total turnover or gross receipts.| | | | |
|In effect, if the gross receipts from profession is > ₹ 50 lakhs ≤ ₹ 75 lakhs, the benefit of section 44ADA can be availed only if aggregate cash receipts in relevant P.Y. ≤ 5% of total gross receipts.| | | | |

Note: For this purpose, the receipt of amount or aggregate of amounts by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, would be deemed to be the receipt in cash.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.303

# (3) Presumptive

|8% of total income|50% of gross turnover/sales/gross receipts|For each heavy vehicle claimed to have been earned by the assessee.|
|---|---|---|
|6% of total turnover/gross receipts|in respect of the amount of total turnover/sales/gross receipts received by A/c payee cheque/bank draft/ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes (credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay) during the P.Y. or before due date of filing of return u/s 139(1) in respect of that P.Y.|(or) such higher sum claimed to have been earned by the assessee.|

# (4) Non-allowability of deductions

Deductions allowable under sections 30 to 38 shall be deemed to have been given full effect to and no further deduction shall be allowed.

Even in case of a firm, salary and interest shall be considered.
# 3.304 INCOME TAX LAW

Presumptive income paid to partners is not deductible. Interest paid to partners is not deductible subject to the conditions and limits specified in section 40(b).

# (5) Written down value of asset

WDV of any asset of an eligible business/profession shall be deemed to have been calculated as if the eligible assessee had claimed and had been actually allowed depreciation for each of the relevant assessment years.

# (6) Requirement of maintenance of books of account

If eligible assessee declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD, he is not required to maintain books of account u/s 44AA or get them audited u/s 44AB. However, if after declaring profits on presumptive basis u/s 44AD, say, for A.Y.2024-25, non-declaration of profits for any of the successive A.Y.s thereafter (i.e., from A.Y.2025-26 to A.Y.2029-30), say, for A.Y. 2026-27, would disentitle the assessee from claiming profits on presumptive basis for five successive AYs subsequent to the AY.
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.305 relevant to the PY of accounts audited u/s such non-declaration audited u/s 44AB. (i.e., from A.Y.2027-28 to A.Y.2031-32). In such a case, the basic assessee would have exemption limit for that year.

To maintain books of account and other documents u/s 44AA(2) and get his accounts audited u/s 44AB, if his total income exceeds the basic exemption limit in those years.

# (7) Advance tax obligation

The eligible assessee opting for section 44AD is required to pay advance tax by 15th March of the financial year (F.Y.). The eligible assessee opting for section 44ADA is required to pay advance tax by 15th March of the F.Y. The eligible assessee has to pay advance tax in four installments [See Chapter 7 in Module 3 for details].

# Meaning of certain terms for the purpose of section 44AE:

|S.No|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|---|
|(1)|Heavy vehicle|any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight of which exceeds 12,000 kilograms.|
|(2)|Gross vehicle weight|total weight of the vehicle and load certified and registered by the registering authority as permissible for that vehicle.|
|(3)|Unladen weight|the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all equipment ordinarily used with the vehicle or trailer when working but excluding the weight of driver or attendant and where alternative parts or bodies are used the unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with the heaviest such alternative body or part.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.306 INCOME TAX LAW

Example:

Let us consider the following particulars relating to a resident individual, Mr. A, being an eligible assessee carrying on retail trade business whose total turnover do not exceed ` 2 crore in any of the previous year relevant to A.Y.2024-25 to A.Y.2026-27-

|Particulars|A.Y.2024-25|A.Y.2025-26|A.Y.2026-27|
|---|---|---|---|
|Total turnover (`)|1,80,00,000|1,90,00,000|2,00,00,000|
|Amount received through prescribed electronic modes on or before 31ˢᵗ October of the A.Y.|1,60,00,000|1,45,00,000|1,80,00,000|
|Income offered for taxation (`)|11,20,000|12,30,000|10,00,000|
|% of gross receipts|6% on ` 1.60 crore and 8% on ` 20 lakhs|6% on ` 1.45 crore and 8% on ` 45 lakhs|5% on ` 2 crore|
|Offered income as per presumptive taxation scheme u/s 44AD|Yes|Yes|No|

In the above case, Mr. A, an eligible assessee, opts for presumptive taxation under section 44AD for A.Y.2024-25 and A.Y.2025-26 and offers income of ` 11.20 lakh and ` 12.30 lakh on gross receipts of ` 1.80 crore and ` 1.90 crore, respectively. However, for A.Y.2026-27, he offers income of only ` 10 lakh on turnover of ` 2 crore, which amounts to 5% of his gross receipts. He maintains books of account under section 44AA and gets the same audited under section 44AB. Since he has not offered income in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) for five consecutive assessment years, after A.Y. 2024-25, he will not be eligible to claim the benefit of section 44AD for next five assessment years succeeding A.Y.2026-27 i.e., from A.Y.2027-28 to 2031-32.

# ILLUSTRATION 16

Mr. Praveen engaged in retail trade, reports a turnover of ` 2,98,50,000 for the financial year 2023-24. Amount received in cash during the P.Y. 2023-24 is ` 14,00,000 and balance through prescribed electronic modes on or before 31ˢᵗ October 2024. His income from the said business as per books of account is ` 15,00,000 computed as per the provisions of Chapter IV-D “Profits and gains from business or Profession” of the Income-tax Act, 1961. Retail trade is the only source of income for Mr. Praveen. A.Y. 2023-24 was the first year for which he declared his business income in accordance with the provisions of presumptive taxation u/s 44AD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.307

1. Is Mr. Praveen also eligible for presumptive determination of his income chargeable to tax for the assessment year 2024-25?
2. If so, determine his income from retail trade as per the applicable presumptive provision.
3. In case Mr. Praveen wants to declare profits as per books of account from retail trade, what are his obligations under the Income-tax Act, 1961?
4. What is the due date for filing his return of income under both the options?

# SOLUTION

1. Yes. Since his cash receipts during the P.Y. does not 5% of the total turnover (14,00,000/2,98,50,000 x 100) and his total turnover for the F.Y.2023-24 is below ₹ 300 lakhs, he is eligible for presumptive taxation scheme under section 44AD in respect of his retail trade business.
2. His income from retail trade, applying the presumptive tax provisions under section 44AD, would be ₹ 18,19,000 (₹ 1,12,000, being 8% of ₹ 14,00,000 + ₹ 17,07,000, being 6% of ₹ 2,84,50,000).
3. Mr. Praveen had declared profit for the previous year 2022-23 in accordance with the presumptive provisions and if he wants to declare profits as per books of account which is lower than the presumptive income for any of the five consecutive assessment years i.e., A.Y. 2024-25 to A.Y. 2028-29, he would not be eligible to claim the benefit of presumptive taxation for five assessment years subsequent to the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the profit has not been declared in accordance the presumptive provisions i.e. if he declares profits lower than the presumptive income in say P.Y. 2023-24 relevant to A.Y.2024-25, then he would not be eligible to claim the benefit of presumptive taxation for A.Y. 2025-26 to A.Y. 2029-30. Consequently, Mr. Praveen is required to maintain the books of accounts and get them audited under section 44AB, since his income exceeds the basic exemption limit.
4. In case he declares presumptive income under section 44AD, the due date would be 31st July, 2024. In case he declares profits as per books of account which is lower than the presumptive income, he is required to get his books of account audited, in which case the due date for filing of return of income would be 31st October, 2024.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.308 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 17

Mr. X commenced the business of operating goods vehicles on 1.4.2023. He purchased the following vehicles during the P.Y.2023-24. Compute his income under section 44AE for A.Y.2024-25.

|Gross Vehicle Weight (in kilograms)|Number|Date of purchase|
|---|---|---|
|7,000|2|10.04.2023|
|6,500|1|15.03.2024|
|10,000|3|16.07.2023|
|11,000|1|02.01.2024|
|15,000|2|29.08.2023|
|15,000|1|23.02.2024|

Would your answer change if the goods vehicles purchased in April, 2023 were put to use only in July, 2023?

# SOLUTION

Since Mr. X does not own more than 10 vehicles at any time during the previous year 2023-24, he is eligible to opt for presumptive taxation scheme under section 44AE. ₹ 1,000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight per month or part of the month for each heavy goods vehicle and ₹ 7,500 per month or part of month for each goods carriage other than heavy goods vehicle, owned by him would be deemed as his profits and gains from such goods carriage. Heavy goods vehicle means any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight of which exceeds 12,000 kg.

|Number of Vehicles|Date of purchase|No. of months for which vehicle is owned|No. of months × No. of vehicles|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|29.08.2023|8|16|
|1|23.02.2024|2|2|
|Total|Total|Total|18|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.309

For goods vehicle other than heavy goods vehicle

|2|10.4.2023|12|24|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|15.3.2024|1|1|
|3|16.7.2023|9|27|
|1|02.1.2024|3|3|

55

The presumptive income of Mr. X under section 44AE for A.Y.2024-25 would be - ` 6,82,500, i.e., 55 × ` 7,500, being for other than heavy goods vehicle + 18 x ` 1,000 x 15 ton being for heavy goods vehicle.

The answer would remain the same even if the two vehicles purchased in April, 2023 were put to use only in July, 2023, since the presumptive income has to be calculated per month or part of the month for which the vehicle is owned by Mr. X.

# 3.16 COMPUTATION OF BUSINESS INCOME IN CASES WHERE INCOME IS PARTLY AGRICULTURAL AND PARTLY BUSINESS IN NATURE

# Taxability in case of composite income

|Rule|Nature of composite income|Business Income (Taxable)|Agricultural Income (Exempt)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|7A|Income from sale of rubber products derived from rubber plants grown by the seller in India|35%|65%| |
|7B|Income from sale of coffee|- grown and cured by the seller in India|25%|75%|
| |- grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India|40%|60%| |
|8|Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by the seller in India|40%|60%| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.310 INCOME TAX LAW

# Notes –

1. In computing income from sale of tea/sale of rubber/sale of coffee, an allowance shall be made in respect of the cost of planting bushes/rubber plants/coffee plants in replacement of bushes/plants that have died or become permanently useless in an area already planted, if such area has not previously been abandoned. For the purpose of determining such cost, no deduction shall be made in respect of the amount of any subsidy which, under the provision of section 10(30) or 10(31), respectively, is not includible in the total income.
2. Section 10(30) provides exemption of subsidy received by an assessee carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing tea in India from or through the Tea Board for replantation or replacement of tea bushes or for rejuvenation or consolidation of areas used for cultivation of tea, subject to fulfillment of specified conditions.
3. Section 10(31) provides exemption of subsidy received by an assessee carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing rubber, coffee, cardamom or other notified commodity in India from or through concerned Board for replantation or replacement of rubber plants, coffee plants, cardamom plants or plants for the growing of other notified commodity or for rejuvenation or consolidation of areas used for cultivation of rubber, coffee, cardamom or other notified commodity, subject to fulfillment of specified conditions.

# ILLUSTRATION 18

Miss Vivitha, a resident and ordinarily resident in India, has derived the following income from various operations (relating to plantations and estates owned by her) during the year ended 31-3-2024:

|S. No.|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Income from sale of centrifuged latex processed from rubber plants grown in Darjeeling.|3,00,000|
|(ii)|Income from sale of coffee grown and cured in Yercaud, Tamil Nadu.|1,00,000|
|(iii)|Income from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded in Colombo. Sale consideration was received at Chennai.|2,50,000|
|(iv)|Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured in Shimla.|4,00,000|
|(v)|Income from sapling and seedling grown in a nursery at Cochin. Basic operations were not carried out by her on land.|80,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.311

You are required to compute the business income and agricultural income of Miss Vivitha for the A.Y. 2024-25.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of business income and agricultural income of Ms. Vivitha for the A.Y.2024-25

|Sr. No.|Source of income|Gross (`)|Business income %|Business income `|Agricultural income `|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(i)|Sale of centrifuged latex from rubber plants grown in India.|3,00,000|35%|1,05,000|1,95,000|
|(ii)|Sale of coffee grown and cured in India.|1,00,000|25%|25,000|75,000|
|(iii)|Sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded outside India. (See Note 1 below)|2,50,000|100%|2,50,000|-|
|(iv)|Sale of tea grown and manufactured in India|4,00,000|40%|1,60,000|2,40,000|
|(v)|Saplings and seedlings grown in nursery in India|80,000| |Nil|80,000|
|Total|Total|5,40,000| |5,90,000| |

# Notes:

1. Where income is derived from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India, 40% of such income is taken as business income and the balance as agricultural income. However, in this question, these operations are done in Colombo, Sri Lanka. Hence, there is no question of such apportionment and the whole income is taxable as business income. Receipt of sale proceeds in India does not make this agricultural income. In the case of an assessee, being a resident and ordinarily resident, the income arising outside India is also chargeable to tax.
2. Explanation 3 to section 2(1A) provides that the income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would be deemed to be agricultural income whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land. Therefore, such income would be exempt u/s 10(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.312 INCOME TAX LAW

# LET US RECAPITULATE

# Method of Accounting [Section 145]

Income chargeable under this head shall be computed in accordance with the method of accounting, either cash or mercantile basis, regularly and consistently employed by the assessee.

# Income chargeable under this head [Section 28]

1. The profits and gains of any business or profession carried on by the assessee at any time during the previous year.
2. Any compensation or other payment due to or received by a person, at or in connection with -
1. Termination of his management or modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto, in case the person is managing the whole or substantially the whole of the affairs of an Indian company.
2. Termination of his office or modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto, in case the person is managing the whole or substantially the whole of the affairs in India of any other company.
3. Termination of agency or modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto, in case the person is holding an agency in India for any part of the activities relating to the business of any other person.
4. Vesting in the Government or in any corporation owned and controlled by the Government, under any law for the time being in force, of the management of any property or business.
5. Termination or the modification of the terms and conditions, of any contract relating to his business.
3. Income derived by a trade, professional or similar association from specific services performed for its members.
4. In the case of an assessee carrying on export business, the following incentives –
1. Profit on sale of import entitlements;
2. Cash assistance against exports under any scheme of GoI;
3. Customs duty or excise re-paid or repayable as drawback;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.313

1. Profit on transfer of Duty Free Replenishment Certificate.
2. The value of any benefit or perquisite arising from business or the exercise of profession, whether

convertible into money or not; or
3. in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind.

Any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration due to, or received by, a partner of a firm from such firm (to the extent allowed as deduction in the hands of the firm). However, the partner’s share in the total income of the firm or LLP is exempt from tax [Section 10(2A)].

Any sum, received or receivable, in cash or kind under an agreement for –

not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or profession; or
not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trademark, licence, franchise or any other business of commercial right of similar nature or information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or provision of services.

Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy.

Fair market value of inventory as on date on which it is converted into or treated as a capital asset.

Any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of any capital asset (other than land or goodwill or financial instrument) being demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred, in respect of which the whole of the expenditure had been allowed as deduction under section 35AD.

# Computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”

As per section 29, the income referred to in section 28 has to be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in sections 30 to 43D.

# Admissible Deductions

|Section|Deduction|
|---|---|
|30|Amount paid on account of rent, rates, taxes, repairs (not including expenditure in the nature of capital expenditure) and insurance for buildings used for the purpose of business or profession. In case the premises are occupied by the assessee as a tenant, the|

# 3.314 INCOME TAX LAW

Amount of repairs would be allowed as deduction only if he has undertaken to bear the cost of repairs to the premises.

Amount paid on account for current repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and furniture used for the purpose of business or profession.

# 32 Depreciation

Depreciation is mandatorily allowable as deduction.

# Conditions for claiming depreciation

- Asset must be used for the purpose of business or profession at any time during the previous year.
- Note: If the asset is acquired during the previous year and is put to use for less than 180 days during that previous year then, only 50% of the depreciation calculated at the rates prescribed will be allowed.

The asset should be owned (wholly or partly) by the assessee.
- The depreciation shall be allowed on the written down value of block of assets at the prescribed rates (except in the case of assets of power generating units, in respect of which depreciation has to be calculated as a percentage of actual cost).

As per section 2(11), block of assets means a group of assets falling within a class of assets comprising:

- (a) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or furniture,
- (b) intangible assets, being know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, not being goodwill of a business or profession;

in respect of which, the same rate of depreciation is prescribed.

# Written Down Value of Assets (W.D.V.) [Section 43(6)]

1. W.D.V. of the block of assets in immediately preceding previous year
2. Less: Depreciation actually allowed in respect of that block of assets in said preceding previous year

Opening balance as on 1ˢᵗ April of the current P.Y.
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

|Increased by -|(3) Actual cost of assets acquired during the previous year, not being on account of acquisition of goodwill of a business or profession|xxx|
|---|---|---|
|Total (1) - (2) + (3)|xxx| |
|Reduced by -|(5) Money receivable in respect of any asset falling within the block which is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed during that previous year together with scrap value. However, such amount cannot exceed the amount in (4).|xxx|
|(6) In case of slump sale, actual cost of the asset (-) amount of depreciation that would have been allowable to the assessee for any assessment year as if the asset was the only asset in the block. However, such amount of reduction cannot exceed the WDV.|xxx| |
|(7) W.D.V at the end of the year (on which depreciation is allowable) [(4) – (5) – (6)]|xxx| |
|(8) Depreciation at the prescribed rate (Rate of Depreciation × WDV arrived at in (7) above)|xxx| |

Note – If the actual cost includes cost of asset put to use for less than 180 days in the relevant P.Y. of acquisition, then, depreciation on such cost would be 50% of the prescribed rate.

# 32(1)(iia)

In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), additional depreciation at the rate of 20% of actual cost of plant or machinery acquired and installed by an assessee engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing or in the business of generation, transmission or distribution of power, shall be allowed.

If plant and machinery is acquired and put to use for the purpose of business or profession for less than 180 days during the previous year in which it is acquired, additional depreciation will get restricted to 10% of actual cost (i.e., 50% of 20%). The balance additional depreciation @10% of actual cost will be
# 3.316 INCOME TAX LAW

allowed in the immediately succeeding previous year if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) in the immediately succeeding previous year.

However, additional depreciation will not be allowed on the following plant or machinery:

- Ships, aircraft, road transport vehicles, office appliances;
- Machinery previously used by any other person;
- Machinery installed in any office premises, residential accommodation, or guest house;
- Machinery in respect of which, the whole of the actual cost is fully allowed as deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) of any one previous year.

# 35 Expenditure on Scientific Research

Expenditure incurred by assessee [Allowable both under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC and the optional tax regime i.e., normal provisions of the Act]

- Any revenue and capital expenditure (other than cost of acquisition of land) on scientific research for in-house research related to its business is allowable as deduction [Section 35(1)(i) & Section 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)].
- Deduction is also allowed in respect of payment of salary or purchase of material inputs for such scientific research during 3 years immediately preceding the year of commencement of business. Such expenditure is deemed to have been incurred in the year of commencement of business and is, hence, allowed as deduction in that year [Section 35(1)(i)].
- Capital expenditure incurred during 3 years immediately preceding the year of commencement of the business is also deemed to have been incurred in the year in which the business commences, and is hence, allowed as deduction in that year [Section 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)].
- Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research can be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against any income of the assessee other than Salaries.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Contributions to Outsiders [Allowable only if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

In case of an assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and paying tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal provisions of the Act, contributions made by any assessee to certain specified/approved institutions shall be entitled to deduction of 100% of contribution made to:

|Section|Association/University/Company/College/IIT|
|---|---|
|35(1)(ii)|Notified approved research association/university/college/other institution for scientific research|
|35(1)(iia)|Approved notified Company for scientific research|
|35(1)(iii)|Notified approved research association/university/college/other institution for research in social science or statistical research|
|35(2AA)|Approved National Laboratory/University/IIT/specified person to be used for scientific research undertaken under an approved programme|

Note – Contribution to outsiders for scientific/social science/statistical research is not allowable under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

# 35AD

This section provides for investment-linked tax deduction in respect of the following specified businesses commencing operations on or after the dates specified thereto, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) -

- setting-up and operating ‘cold chain’ facilities for specified products (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2009);
- setting-up and operating warehousing facilities for storing agricultural produce (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2009);
- laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage facilities being an integral part of such network (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2007);

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.318 INCOME TAX LAW

- building and operating a hotel of two-star or above category, anywhere in India (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2010);
- building and operating a hospital, anywhere in India, with at least 100 beds for patients (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2010);
- developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme for slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or a State Government (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2010);
- developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme for affordable housing framed by the Central Government or State Government (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2011);
- production of fertilizer in India (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2011);
- setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962 (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
- bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
- setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
- laying and operating a slurry pipeline for transportation of iron-ore (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2014);
- setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing unit, if such unit is notified by the Board in accordance with the prescribed guidelines (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2014);
- developing or maintaining and operating or developing, maintaining and operating a new infrastructure facility (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2017)

Quantum of deduction - 100% of the capital expenditure (other than expenditure on acquisition of any land, goodwill or financial instrument) incurred during the previous year, wholly and exclusively for the above specified businesses would be allowed as deduction from the business income of an assessee, if he has opted for the provisions of section 35AD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purpose of specified business prior to commencement of operation would be allowed as deduction during the previous year in which the assessee commences operation of his specified business, provided the amount incurred prior to commencement has been capitalized in the books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its operations.

Payment exceeding ` 10,000 to be made through prescribed electronic modes to qualify for deduction u/s 35AD - Any expenditure in respect of which payment or aggregate of payment made to a person of an amount exceeding ` 10,000 in a day otherwise than by account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes would not be eligible for deduction.

Non-eligibility for deduction u/s 10AA or Chapter VI-A - An assessee availing investment-linked tax deduction u/s 35AD in respect of any specified business in any assessment year, is not eligible for claiming profit-linked deduction under Chapter VI-A or section 10AA for the same or any other A.Y. in respect of such specified business if the assessee has claimed or opted for section 35AD and deduction thereunder has been allowed to him.

Asset to be used only for specified business for 8 years - Any asset in respect of which a deduction is claimed and allowed under section 35AD shall be used only for the specified business, for a period of 8 years beginning with the previous year in which such asset is acquired or constructed. If such asset is used for any purpose other than the specified business, the total amount of deduction so claimed and allowed u/s 35AD in any previous year in respect of such asset, as reduced by the depreciation allowable under section 32 as if no deduction had been allowed under section 35AD, shall be deemed to be the business income of the assessee of the previous year in which the asset is so used.

Note – This deduction is not allowable under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

# 35D

Preliminary expenditure incurred by Indian companies and other resident non-corporate assessees shall be allowed as deduction over a period of 5 years beginning with the previous year in which
# 3.320 INCOME TAX LAW

business commences or in which extension of the undertaking is completed or the new unit commences operation or production.

Examples of Preliminary expenses – expenses on preparation of project report, feasibility report, market survey, engineering services, legal charges for drafting agreement.

In case of a Company, preliminary expenses would include, in addition to the above, legal charges for drafting MOA, AOA, printing of MOA and AOA, fee for registration of Co., expenditure in connection with issue of shares or debentures of Co. (i.e. underwriting commission, brokerage and charges for drafting, typing, printing and advertisement of the prospectus)

Qualifying amount - Maximum aggregate amount of the qualifying expenses that can be amortized is 5% of the cost of project (i.e., actual cost of fixed assets in the books of account on the last day of the P.Y.).

In case of an Indian company, 5% of the cost of project or at its option, 5% of the capital employed by the company (aggregate of issued share capital, debentures, long-term borrowings as on the last day of the P.Y.), whichever is higher.

# 35DDA

One-fifth of the expenditure incurred by an assessee-employer in any previous year in the form of payment to any employee in connection with his voluntary retirement in accordance with a scheme of voluntary retirement, shall be allowed as deduction in that previous year and the balance in four equal installments in the immediately four succeeding previous years.

# 36(1)(iii)

Interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of business or profession.

However, any interest paid for acquisition of an asset (whether capitalized in the books of account or not) for any period beginning from the date on which the capital was borrowed for acquisition of the asset till the date on which such asset was first put to use, shall not be allowed as deduction. Such amount of interest would be added to the actual cost of asset.

# 36(1)(iv)

Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution towards a recognized provident fund or approved superannuation fund.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.321

# 36(1)(iva)

Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution towards a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, to the extent of 10% of salary of any employee. Salary includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide. Correspondingly, section 40A(9) disallows the sum paid in excess of 10% of the salary of any employee.

# 36(1)(v)

Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund created by him for the exclusive benefit of his employees under an irrevocable trust.

# 36(1)(va)

Amount received by assessee-employer as contribution from his employees towards their welfare fund to be allowed as deduction only if such amount is credited by the assessee to the employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before due date under the relevant Act/Rule/order/notification. Amount credited after the said due date but on or before the due date under section 139(1) would not be eligible for deduction.

# 36(1)(vii)

Any bad debts written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee for the previous year, provided the debt has been taken into account in computing the income of the previous year or any earlier previous year. Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of the assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs to be allowed as deduction in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable. If a debt, which has not been recognized in the books of account as per the requirement of the accounting standards but has been taken into account in the computation of income as per the notified ICDSs, has become irrecoverable, it can still be claimed as bad debts under section 36(1)(vii) since it shall be deemed that the debt has been written off as irrecoverable in the books of account by virtue of the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii). This is because some ICDSs require recognition of income at an earlier point of time (prior to the point of time such income is recognised in the books of account). Consequently, if the whole or part of such income recognised at an earlier point of time for tax purposes becomes irrecoverable, it can be claimed as bad debts on account of the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii).

# 36(1)(ix)

Any bona fide expenditure incurred by a company for the purpose of promoting family planning amongst its employees. In case the expenditure or part thereof is of capital nature, one-
# 3.322 INCOME TAX LAW

Fifth of such expenditure shall be deducted for the previous year in which it was incurred; and the balance in four equal installments in four succeeding previous years.

Family planning expenses, whether revenue or capital, is not allowable as deduction for non-corporate assesses, like individuals, HUFs, firms, LLPs.

# 36(1)(xv)

An amount equal to the securities transaction tax (STT) paid by the assessee in respect of taxable securities transactions entered into in the course of his business during the previous year, if the income arising from such taxable securities transactions is included in the income computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# 36(1)(xvi)

An amount equal to commodities transaction tax (CTT) paid in respect of taxable commodities transactions entered into the course of business during the previous year, if the income arising from such taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# General

# 37(1)

An expenditure shall be allowed under section 37, provided:

- It is not in the nature of expenditure described under sections 30 to 36;
- It is not in the nature of capital expenditure;
- It is not a personal expenditure of the assessee;
- It is laid out and expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of business/profession;
- It is not incurred for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law; and
- It is not an expenditure incurred by the assessee on CSR activities referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Expenditure incurred for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law would include and would be deemed to have always included the expenditure incurred by an assessee, -

1. For any purpose which is an offence under any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India or which is prohibited by any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India;
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.323

(ii) to provide any benefit or perquisite to a person, whether or not carrying on a business or exercising a profession, and acceptance of such benefit or perquisite by such person is in violation of any law or rule or regulation or guidelines, as the case may be, for the time being in force, governing the conduct of such person; or

(iii) to compound an offence under any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India.

# 37(2B)

Any expenditure incurred for advertisement in any souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet etc. published by a political party is not allowable as deduction.

# Amounts not deductible

|Section|Particulars|
|---|---|
|40(a)(i)|Any interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum chargeable under the Act, which is payable outside India or in India to a non corporate non-resident or to a foreign company, on which tax deductible at source has not been deducted or after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date specified u/s 139(1). However, if such tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or has been deducted in the previous year but paid in the subsequent year after the due date specified under section 139(1), such sum shall be allowed as deduction in computing the income of the previous year in which such tax is paid.|
|40(a)(ia)|30% of any sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XVII-B and such tax has not been deducted or, after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date for filing of return of income u/s 139(1). However, if such tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or has been deducted in the previous year but paid in the subsequent year after the due date specified under section 139(1), 30% of such sum shall be allowed as deduction in computing the income of the previous year in which such tax is paid.|
|40(a)(ii)|Any sum paid on account of income-tax including surcharge or cess|
|40(a)(iii)|Any payment chargeable under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable outside India or to a non-resident, if tax has not been paid thereon nor deducted therefrom|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.324 INCOME TAX LAW

40(a)(v) Tax paid by the employer on non-monetary perquisites provided to its employees, which is exempt under section 10(10CC) in the hands of the employee.

In case of partnership firms or LLPs -

# 40(b)

(i) Salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, paid to any partner who is not a working partner;

(ii) Payment of remuneration to a working partner or interest to any partner, which is not –

- authorized by the partnership deed; or
- in accordance with the terms of the partnership deed.

(iii) Payment of remuneration to a working partner or interest to any partner authorized by and in accordance with the terms of the partnership deed, but relates to a period falling prior to the date of such partnership and is not authorized by the earlier partnership deed.

(iv) Payment of interest to any partner authorised by and in accordance with the terms of the partnership deed and falling after the date of the partnership deed to the extent of the excess of the amount calculated at 12% simple interest per annum.

(v) Payment of remuneration to a working partner which is authorized by and in accordance with the partnership deed to the extent the aggregate of such payment to working partners exceed the following limits -

- (a) On the first ` 3,00,000 of ` 1,50,000 or 90% of the book-profit or in case of a loss, whichever is more.
- (b) On the balance of book-profit 60%

# Meaning of Book profit:

Book profit means the net profit as shown in the P & L A/c for the relevant previous year computed in accordance with the provisions for computing income from profits and gains.

The above amount should be increased by the remuneration paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

or payable to all partners of the firm if the same has been deducted while computing net profit.

# Expenses or payments not deductible in certain circumstances

|Section|Particulars|
|---|---|
|40A(2)|Any expenditure incurred in respect of which a payment is made to a related person or entity, to the extent it is considered excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer.|

Few examples of related persons are as under:

|Assessee|Related Person|
|---|---|
|Individual|Any relative of the individual (husband or wife, brother or sister, any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual)|
|Firm|Any partner of the firm or relative of such partner|
|HUF or AOP|Any member of the AOP or HUF or any relative of such member|
|Company|Director of the company or any relative of the director|
|Any assessee|Any individual who has a substantial interest (20% or more voting power or beneficial entitlement to 20% of profits) in the business or profession of the assessee; or a relative of such individual.|

40A(3)
Any expenditure, in respect of which a payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a single day otherwise than by account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes exceeds ` 10,000.

In case of payments made to transport operator for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, an enhanced limit of ` 35,000 shall apply. If the payment/payments exceed this limit, the entire expenditure would be disallowed. However, disallowance would not be attracted if the cases and circumstances in which payment is made otherwise than by way of an account payee cheque or bank draft are covered in Rule 6DD.

Few Examples of exceptions covered in Rule 6DD:

Payment to RBI, SBI, Co-operative banks
# 3.326 INCOME TAX LAW

Payment made to Government, which according to its Rules, has to be made in legal tender.

Payment for purchase of agricultural produce, forest produce, fish and fish products, productions of horticulture or apiculture to the cultivator, grower or producer of such produce or products.

# 40A(3A)

Where an expenditure has been allowed as deduction on accrual basis in any previous year, and payment is made in a subsequent previous year otherwise than by account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes and such payment (or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day is made in a subsequent previous year) is in excess of the limits of ` 10,000/ ` 35,000 specified above, the payment/aggregate of payments so made shall be deemed as profits and gains of the business or profession and charged to tax as income of the subsequent previous year. However, the deeming provision will not apply in the cases and circumstances covered in Rule 6DD.

# 40A(7)

Provision for payment of gratuity to employees. However, disallowance would not be attracted if provision is made for contribution to approved gratuity fund or for payment of gratuity that has become payable during the year.

# Profits chargeable to tax [Section 41]

# 41(1)

Where deduction was allowed in respect of loss, expenditure or trading liability for any year and subsequently, during any previous year, the assessee or successor of the business has obtained any amount in respect of such loss or expenditure or some benefit in respect of such trading liability by way of remission or cessation thereof, the amount obtained or the value of benefit accrued shall be deemed to be income of the P.Y. in which such benefit was obtained.

# 41(3)

Amount realized on transfer of an asset used for scientific research without being used for other purposes is taxable as business income in the year of sale to the extent of lower of –

- detection allowed under section 35(1)(iv); and
- sale proceeds

# 41(4)

Any amount recovered by the assessee against bad debt earlier allowed as deduction shall be taxed as income in the year in which it is received.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.327

# Certain Deductions to be allowed only on Actual Payment [Section 43B]

In respect of the following sums payable by an assessee during the P.Y., deduction is allowable only if the sum is actually paid on or before the due date of filing of return u/s 139(1) for the said P.Y. Otherwise, the same would be allowed only in the year in which the sum is actually paid.

1. Tax, duty, cess or fee, under any law for the time being in force; or
2. Contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of employees; or
3. Bonus or commission for services rendered by employees, where such sum would not have been payable to him as profits or dividend if it had not been paid as bonus or commission; or
4. Interest on any loan or borrowing from any public financial institution or a State Financial Corporation or a State Industrial Investment Corporation, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing; or
5. Interest on any loan or borrowing from notified class of non-banking financial companies, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing.
6. Interest on any loan or advance from a scheduled bank or co-operative bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or advances; or
7. Payment in lieu of any leave at the credit of his employee.
8. Any sum payable to the Indian Railways for use of Railway assets.

However, any sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise beyond the time-limit specified in section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 would be allowed as deduction only in the P.Y. in which the sum is actually paid.

Section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 mandates payment of goods or services to supplier, being a micro or small enterprises on or before the date as per the written agreement, which cannot be more than 45 days. If there is no such written agreement, the payment shall be made before the appointed day i.e., within 15 days.

If the sum is paid within the said period, deduction would be allowed in the year of accrual. If it is paid after the said period, then, deduction would be allowed only in the year of actual payment, even if it is paid on or before the due date of filing return of income u/s 139(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.328 INCOME TAX LAW

# Other Provisions

# Section 43CA

Where the consideration for the transfer of an asset (other than capital asset), being land or building or both, is less than the stamp duty value, the value so adopted or assessed or assessable (i.e., the stamp duty value) shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration for the purposes of computing income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. However, if the stamp duty value does not exceed 110% of the actual consideration received or accruing then, such consideration shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration for the purpose of computing profits and gains from transfer of such asset. Further, where the date of an agreement fixing the value of consideration for the transfer of the asset and the date of registration of the transfer of the asset are not same, the stamp duty value may be taken as on the date of the agreement for transfer instead of on the date of registration for such transfer, provided at least a part of the consideration has been received by way of an account payee cheque/ account payee bank draft or use of ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes on or before the date of the agreement.

# Section 44AB

Mandatory audit of accounts of certain persons

|Category of person|Condition for applicability of section 44AB|
|---|---|
|I In case of a person carrying on business|If his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business > ` 1 crore in the relevant PY.|
|Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB does not apply to a person who declares profits and gains for the previous year on presumptive basis u/s 44AD(1).|Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB does not apply to a person who declares profits and gains for the previous year on presumptive basis u/s 44AD(1).|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.329

If in case of such person carrying on business –

1. Aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total receipts (incl. receipts for sales, turnover, gross receipts); and
2. Aggregate cash payments in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total payments (incl. amount incurred for expenditure)

Note – For this purpose, the payment or receipt, as the case may be, by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, would be deemed to be the payment or receipt, as the case may be, in cash.

(b) In case of an assessee covered u/s 44AE i.e., an assessee engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages who owns not more than 10 goods carriages at any time during the P.Y.

If such assessee claims that the profits and gains from business in the relevant P.Y. are lower than the profits and gains computed on a presumptive basis u/s 44AE [i.e., ` 1000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight in case of each heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 for each vehicle, other than heavy goods vehicle, for every month or part of the month for which the vehicle is owned by the assessee].

(c) In case of an eligible assessee carrying on business, whose total turnover, sales, gross receipts ≤ ` 200 lakhs, and who has opted for section 44AD in any earlier PY (say, P.Y.2022-23)

In case of an eligible assessee carrying on business, whose aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total turnover or gross receipts and then, he cannot opt for section 44AD for five successive PYs after the year of such default (i.e., from P.Y.2024-25 to P.Y.2028-29).
# 3.330 INCOME TAX LAW

whose total turnover, sales, the year of default (i.e., P.Y. gross receipts ≤ ` 300 lakhs, 2023-24) and five successive previous years (i.e., P.Y.2024-25 to P.Y.2028-29), he has to maintain books of account u/s 44AA and get them audited u/s 44AB, if his income exceeds the basic exemption limit.

# II In case of persons carrying on profession

(a) In case of a person carrying on profession

If his gross receipts in profession > ` 50 lakh in the relevant PY

Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB does not apply to a person who declares profits and gains for the previous year on presumptive basis u/s 44ADA(1).

(b) In case of an assessee carrying on a notified profession under section 44AA(1) i.e., legal, medical, engineering, accountancy, architecture, interior decoration, technical consultancy, whose gross receipts ≤ ` 50 lakhs.

If such resident assessee claims that the profits and gains from such profession in the relevant PY are lower than the profits and gains computed on a presumptive basis u/s 44ADA (50% of gross receipts) and his income exceeds the basic exemption limit in that PY.

In case of an assessee carrying on a notified profession under section 44AA(1) i.e., legal, medical, engineering, accountancy, architecture, interior decoration, technical consultancy, whose aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total gross receipts and whose gross receipts ≤ ` 75 lakhs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3.331

# Presumptive Income provisions

|Section|Particulars|Deemed profits and gains|
|---|---|---|
|44AD|Any individual, HUF or firm who is a resident (other than LLP) who has not claimed deduction under section 10AA or Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes” engaged in any business (except the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages referred to in section 44AE) and whose total turnover or gross receipts in the previous year does not exceed ` 2 crore.|8% of gross receipts or total turnover or such higher sum claimed to have been earned by him|
| |However, the presumptive income would be 6% (instead of 8%) of total turnover or sales, in respect of amount which is received| |
| |• by an account payee cheque or| |
| |• by an account payee bank draft or| |
| |• by use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or| |
| |• through such other prescribed electronic modes during the previous year or before the due date of filing of return u/s 139(1) in respect of that previous year.| |

# Non-applicability of section 44AD

This section will not apply to –

- (i) a person carrying on specified professions referred to in section 44AA(1),
- (ii) a person earning income in the nature of commission or brokerage;
- (iii) a person carrying on agency business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.332 INCOME TAX LAW

# 44ADA

An assessee, being an individual or a partnership firm (other than LLP) resident in India, who is engaged – in any profession referred to in section 44AA(1) such as legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or any other profession as is notified by the Board in the Official Gazette; and whose total gross receipts does not exceed ` 50 lakhs in a previous year.

If aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total turnover or gross receipts of the assessee, a higher gross receipts threshold of ` 75 lakhs would be applicable.

# 44AE

Any assessee who owns not more than ten goods carriages at any time during the previous year and who is engaged in the business of plying, hiring and leasing goods carriages.

|For each heavy goods vehicle,|` 1,000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight, as the case may be, for every month or part of a month during which the vehicle is owned by the assessee.|
|---|---|
|For each vehicle, other than heavy goods vehicle,|` 7,500 per month or part of a month during which such vehicle is owned by the assessee (or) an amount claimed to have been actually earned from such vehicle, whichever is higher.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# Taxability in case of composite income

In cases where income is derived from the sale of rubber manufactured or processed from rubber plants grown by the seller in India, coffee grown and cured/grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India, or tea grown and manufactured by the seller in India, the income shall be computed as if it were income derived from business, and a specified percentage of such income, as given in the table below, shall be deemed to be income liable to tax -

|Rule|Nature of composite income|Business income (Taxable)|Agricultural Income (Exempt)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|7A|Income from sale of rubber products derived from rubber plants grown by the seller in India|35%|65%| |
|7B|Income from sale of coffee|- grown and cured by the seller in India|25%|75%|
| |- grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India|40%|60%| |
|8|Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by the seller in India|40%|60%| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.334 INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Venus, engaged in manufacture of pesticides, furnishes the following particulars relating to its manufacturing unit at Chennai, for the year ending 31-3-2024:

| |(` in lakhs)|
|---|---|
|WDV of Plant and Machinery on 31.3.2023|30.00|
|Depreciation including additional depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23|4.75|
|New machinery purchased on 1-9-2023|10.00|
|New machinery purchased on 1-12-2023|8.00|
|Computer purchased on 3-1-2024|4.00|

Additional information:

- All assets were purchased by A/c payee cheque.
- All assets were put to use immediately.
- New machinery purchased on 1-12-2023 and computer have been installed in the office.
- During the year ended 31-3-2023, a new machinery had been purchased on 31-10-2022, for ` 10 lakhs. Additional depreciation, besides normal depreciation, had been claimed thereon.
- Depreciation rate for machinery may be taken as 15%.
- The assessee has no brought forward business loss or unabsorbed depreciation as on 1.4.2023.

Compute the depreciation available to the assessee as per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the WDV of different blocks of assets as on 31-3-2024 if -

1. he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)
2. he pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

2. Mr. Abhimanyu is engaged in the business of generation and distribution of electric power. He opts to claim depreciation on written down value for
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.335 income-tax purposes. From the following details, compute the depreciation allowable as per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the A.Y. 2024-25, assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):

|Particulars|(` in lacs)|
|---|---|
|(i) WDV of block as on 31.3.2023 (15% rate)|50.00|
|(ii) Depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23|7.50|
|(iii) New machinery purchased on 12-10-2023|10.00|
|(iv) Machinery imported from Colombo on 12-4-2023.|9.00|
|This machine had been used only in Colombo earlier and the assessee is the first user in India.|This machine had been used only in Colombo earlier and the assessee is the first user in India.|
|(v) New computer installed in generation wing unit on 15-7-2023|2.00|

All assets were purchased by A/c payee cheque.

# 3.

Examine with reasons, the allowability of the following expenses incurred by Mr. Manav, a wholesale dealer of commodities, under the Income-tax Act, 1961 while computing profit and gains from business or profession for the A.Y. 2024-25 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) -

- (i) Construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities amounting to ` 5,60,000.
- (ii) Purchase of building for the purpose of specified business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of food grains amounting to ` 4,50,000.
- (iii) Interest on loan paid to Mr. X (a resident) ` 50,000 on which tax has not been deducted. The sales for the P.Y. 2022-23 was ` 202 lakhs. Mr. X has not paid the tax, if any, on such interest.
- (iv) Commodities transaction tax paid ` 20,000 on sale of bullion.

# 4.

Examine with reasons, for the following sub-divisions, whether the following statements are true or false having regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.336 INCOME TAX LAW

1. For a dealer in shares and securities, securities transaction tax paid in a recognized stock exchange is permissible business expenditure.
2. Where a person follows mercantile system of accounting, an expenditure of ` 25,000 has been allowed on accrual basis and in a later year, in respect of the said expenditure, assessee makes the payment of ` 25,000 through a crossed cheque, ` 25,000 can be the profits and gains of business under section 40A(3A) in the year of payment.
3. It is mandatory to provide for depreciation under section 32 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, while computing income under the head “Profits and Gains from Business and Profession”.
4. The mediclaim premium paid to GIC by Mr. Lomesh for his employees, by an account payee cheque on 27.12.2023 is a deductible expenditure under section 36.
5. Under section 35DDA, amortization of expenditure incurred under eligible Voluntary Retirement Scheme at the time of retirement alone, can be done.
6. An individual engaged in trading activities and exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) can claim additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia) in respect of new plant acquired and installed in the trading concern, where the increase in value of such plant as compared to the approved base year is more than 10%.

# 5. Examine, with reasons, the allowability of the following expenses under the Income-tax Act, 1961 while computing income from business or profession for the A.Y. 2024-25:

1. Provision made on the basis of actuarial valuation for payment of gratuity ` 5,00,000. However, no payment on account of gratuity was made before due date of filing return.
2. Purchase of oil seeds of ` 50,000 in cash from a farmer on a banking day.
3. Tax on non-monetary perquisite provided to an employee ` 20,000.
4. Payment of ` 50,000 by using credit card for fire insurance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.337

(v) Salary payment of ` 10,00,000 to Mr. X outside India by a company without deduction of tax assuming Mr. X has not paid tax on such salary income.

(vi) Payment made in cash ` 30,000 to a transporter in a day for carriage of goods.

# 6.

Examine with reasons, whether the following statements are true or false, with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:

- (a) Payment made in respect of a business expenditure incurred on 16th February, 2024 for ` 25,000 through a crossed cheque is hit by the provisions of section 40A(3).
- (b)
- (i) It is a condition precedent to write off in the books of account, the amount due from debtor to claim deduction for bad debt.
- (ii) Failure to deduct tax at source in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, inter alia, from the amounts payable to a non-resident as rent or royalty, will result in disallowance while computing the business income where the non-resident payee has not paid the tax due on such income.

# 7.

Mr. Sivam, a retail trader of Cochin gives the following Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31ˢᵗ March, 2024:

# Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31.03.2024

|Particulars|`|Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|To Opening stock|90,000|By Sales|1,12,11,500|
|To Purchases|1,10,04,000|By Closing stock|1,86,100|
|To Gross Profit|3,03,600| | |
| |1,13,97,600| |1,13,97,600|
|To Salary|60,000|By Gross profit b/d|3,03,600|
|To Rent and rates|36,000|By Income from UTI|2,400|
|To Interest on loan|15,000| | |
|To Depreciation|1,05,000| | |
|To Printing & stationery|23,200| | |
|To Postage & telegram|1,640| | |

# 3.338 INCOME TAX LAW

|To Loss on sale of shares (Short-term)|8,100|
|---|---|
|To Other general expenses|7,060|
|To Net Profit|50,000|
|3,06,000|3,06,000|
|3,06,000|3,06,000|

# Additional Information:

1. It was found that some stocks were omitted to be included in both the Opening and Closing Stock, the values of which were:
- Opening stock ` 9,000
- Closing stock ` 18,000
2. Salary includes ` 10,000 paid to his brother, which is unreasonable to the extent of ` 2,000.
3. The whole amount of printing and stationery was paid in cash by way of one-time payment to Mr. Ramesh.
4. The depreciation provided in the Profit and Loss Account ` 1,05,000 was based on the following information:
- The opening balance of plant and machinery (i.e., the written down value as on 31.3.2023 minus depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23) is ` 4,20,000. A new plant falling under the same block of depreciation was bought on 01.7.2023 for ` 70,000. Two old plants were sold on 1.10.2023 for ` 50,000.
5. Rent and rates includes GST liability of ` 3,400 paid on 7.4.2024.
6. Other general expenses include ` 2,000 paid as donation to a Public Charitable Trust.

You are required to compute the profits and gains of Mr. Sivam under presumptive taxation u/s 44AD and profits and gains as per the regular provisions of the Act assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Assume that the whole of the amount of turnover received by account payee cheque or use of electronic clearing system through bank account during the previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Mr. Sukhvinder is engaged in the business of plying goods carriages. On 1st April, 2023, he owns 10 trucks (out of which 6 are heavy goods vehicles, the gross vehicle weight of such goods vehicle is 15,000 kg each). On 2nd May, 2023, he sold one of the heavy goods vehicles and purchased a light goods vehicle on 6th May, 2023. This new vehicle could, however, be put to use only on 15th June, 2023.

Compute the total income of Mr. Sukhvinder for the A.Y. 2024-25, taking note of the following data:

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Freight charges collected|12,70,000| |
|Less: Operational expenses|6,25,000| |
|Depreciation as per section 32|1,85,000| |
|Other office expenses|15,000|8,25,000|
|Net Profit|4,45,000| |
|Other business and non-business income| |70,000|

Mr. Raju, a manufacturer at Chennai, gives the following Manufacturing, Trading and Profit & Loss Account for the year ended 31.03.2024:

# Manufacturing, Trading and Profit & Loss Account for the year ended 31.03.2024

|Particulars|`|Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|To Opening Stock|71,000|By Sales|2,32,00,000|
|To Purchase of Raw Materials|2,16,99,000|By Closing stock|2,00,000|
|To Manufacturing Wages & Expenses|5,70,000| | |
|To Gross Profit|10,60,000| | |
| |2,34,00,000| |2,34,00,000|
|To Administrative charges|3,26,000|By Gross Profit|10,60,000|
|To SGST penalty|5,000|By Dividend from domestic companies|15,000|
|To GST paid|1,10,000|By Income from agriculture (net)|1,80,000|
|To General Expenses|54,000| | |

# 3.340 INCOME TAX LAW

|To Interest to Bank|60,000|
|---|---|
|To Depreciation|2,00,000|
|To Net Profit|5,00,000|
|12,55,000|12,55,000|
|12,55,000|12,55,000|

Following are the further information relating to the financial year 2023-24:

1. Administrative charges include ₹ 46,000 paid as commission to brother of the assessee. The commission amount at the market rate is ₹ 36,000.
2. The assessee paid ₹ 33,000 in cash to a transport carrier on 29.12.2023. This amount is included in manufacturing expenses. (Assume that the provisions relating to TDS are not applicable to this payment)
3. A sum of ₹ 4,000 per month was paid as salary to a staff throughout the year and this has not been recorded in the books of account.
4. Bank term loan interest actually paid upto 31.03.2024 was ₹ 20,000 and the balance was paid in November 2024.
5. Housing loan principal repaid during the year was ₹ 50,000 and it relates to residential property acquired by him in P.Y. 2022-23 for self-occupation. Interest on housing loan was ₹ 23,000. Housing loan was taken from Canara Bank. These amounts were not dealt with in the profit and loss account given above.
6. Depreciation allowable under the Act is to be computed on the basis of following information:
|Plant & Machinery (Depreciation rate@15%)|₹|
|---|---|
|WDV as on 31.03.2023 minus Depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23|11,90,000|
|Additions during the year (used for more than 180 days)|2,00,000|
|Total additions during the year|4,00,000|

Compute the total income of Mr. Raju for the A.Y. 2024-25 assuming he pays tax under default tax regime.

Note: Ignore application of section 14A for disallowance of expenditures in respect of any exempt income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Mr. Tenzingh is engaged in composite business of growing and curing (further processing) coffee in Coorg, Karnataka. The whole of coffee grown in his plantation is cured. Relevant information pertaining to the year ended 31.3.2024 are given below:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Opening balance of car (only asset in the block) as on 1.4.2023|3,00,000|
|Opening balance of machinery as on 1.4.2023|15,00,000|
|Expenses incurred for growing coffee|3,10,000|
|Expenditure for curing coffee|3,00,000|
|Sale value of cured coffee|22,00,000|

Besides being used for agricultural operations, the car is also used for personal use; disallowance for personal use may be taken at 20%. The expenses incurred for car running and maintenance are ` 50,000. The machines were used in coffee curing business operations.

# Compute the income arising from the above activities for the A.Y. 2024-25.

# ANSWERS

# 1. Computation of written down value of block of assets of Venus Ltd. as on 31.3.2024

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (` in lacs)|Computer (` in lacs)|
|---|---|---|
|Written down value (as on 31.3.2023)|30.00|Nil|
|Less: Depreciation including additional depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23|4.75|-|
|Opening balance as on 1.4.2023|25.25| |
|Add: Actual cost of new assets acquired during the year| | |
|New machinery purchased on 1.9.2023|10.00|-|
|New machinery purchased on 1.12.2023|8.00|-|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.342 INCOME TAX LAW

Computer purchased on 3.1.2024 - 4.00

43.25 4.00

Less: Assets sold/discarded/destroyed during the year

Nil Nil

Written Down Value (as on 31.03.2024) 43.25 4.00

(i) If Mr. Venus exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

In this case, since his income would be computed under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act, he would be entitled for normal depreciation and additional depreciation, subject to fulfilment of conditions.

# Computation of depreciation for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (` in lacs)|Computer (` in lacs)|
|---|---|---|
|I. Assets put to use for more than 180 days, eligible for 100% depreciation calculated applying the eligible rate of normal depreciation and additional depreciation| | |
|Normal Depreciation| | |
|- WDV of plant and machinery (` 25.25 lacs x 15%)|3.79|-|
|- New Machinery purchased on 1.9.2023 (` 10 lacs x 15%)|1.50|-|
|(A)|5.29|-|
|Additional Depreciation| | |
|New Machinery purchased on 1.9.2023 (` 10 lakhs x 20%)|2.00|-|
|Balance additional depreciation in respect of new machinery purchased on 31.10.2022 and put to use for less than 180 days in the P.Y. 2022-23 (` 10 lakhs x 20% x 50%)|1.00| |
|(B)|3.00| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

|II. Assets put to use for less than 180 days, eligible for 50% depreciation calculated applying the eligible rate of normal depreciation and additional depreciation, if any| | |
|---|---|---|
|Normal Depreciation| | |
|New machinery purchased on 1.12.2023 [` 8 lacs x 7.5% (i.e., 50% of 15%)]|0.60|-|
|Computer purchased on 3.1.2023 [` 4 lacs x 20% (50% of 40%)]|-|0.80|
|(C)|0.60|0.80|
|Total Depreciation (A+B+C)|8.89|0.80|

# Notes:

1. As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in the case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after 31.3.2005, by an assessee engaged, inter alia, in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing, at the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant. However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter alia,–
1. any office appliances or road transport vehicles;
2. any machinery or plant installed in, inter alia, office premises.

In view of the above provisions, additional depreciation cannot be claimed in respect of -
1. Machinery purchased on 1.12.2023, installed in office and
2. Computer purchased on 3.1.2024, installed in office.
2. Balance additional depreciation@10% on new plant or machinery acquired and put to use for less than 180 days in the year of acquisition which has not been allowed in that year, shall be allowed in the immediately succeeding previous year. Hence, in this case, the balance additional depreciation@10% (i.e., ` 1 lakhs, being 10% of ` 10 lakhs) in respect of new machinery which had
# 3.344 INCOME TAX LAW

been purchased during the previous year 2022-23 and put to use for less than 180 days in that year can be claimed in P.Y. 2023-24 being immediately succeeding previous year.

(i) If Mr. Venus pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

In this case, under the default tax regime as per section 115BAC, he would be entitled only for normal depreciation but not additional depreciation.

# Computation of depreciation for A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|Plant & Machinery (` in lacs)|Computer (` in lacs)|
|---|---|---|
|I. Assets put to use for more than 180 days, eligible for 100% depreciation calculated applying the eligible rate of normal depreciation| | |
|Normal Depreciation|WDV of plant and machinery|-|
|(` 25.25 lacs x 15%)|3.79|-|
|New Machinery purchased on 1.9.2023|1.50|-|
|(` 10 lacs x 15%)|(A) 5.29|-|
|II. Assets put to use for less than 180 days, eligible for 50% depreciation calculated applying the eligible rate of normal depreciation| | |
|Normal Depreciation|New machinery purchased on 1.12.2023|-|
|[` 8 lacs x 7.5% (i.e., 50% of 15%)]|0.60|-|
|Computer purchased on 3.1.2023|-|0.80|
|[` 4 lacs x 20% (50% of 40%)]|(C) 0.60|0.80|
|Total Depreciation (A+B+C)|5.89|0.80|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 3. Computation of depreciation under section 32 for A.Y.2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Normal Depreciation| |
|Depreciation@15% on ` 51,50,000, being machinery put to use for more than 180 days|7,72,500|
|[WDV as on 31.3.2023 of ` 50,00,000 – Depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23 of ` 7,50,000 + Purchase cost of imported machinery of ` 9,00,000]| |
|Depreciation@7.5% on ` 10,00,000, being new machinery put to use for less than 180 days|75,000|
| |8,47,500|
|Depreciation@40% on computers purchased ` 2,00,000|80,000|
| |9,27,500|
|Additional Depreciation (Refer Note below)| |
|Additional Depreciation@10% of ` 10,00,000|1,00,000|
|[being actual cost of new machinery purchased on 12-10-2023]| |
|Additional Depreciation@20% on new computer installed in generation wing of the unit [20% of ` 2,00,000]|40,000|
| |1,40,000|
|Depreciation on Plant and Machinery|10,67,500|

# Note:

Mr. Abhimanyu is eligible for additional depreciation since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The benefit of additional depreciation is available to new plant and machinery acquired and installed in power sector undertakings. Accordingly, additional depreciation is allowable in the case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed by an assessee engaged, inter alia, in the business of generation, transmission or distribution of power, at the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant. Therefore, new computer installed in generation wing units eligible for additional depreciation@20%. Since the new machinery was purchased only on 12.10.2023, it was put to use for less than 180 days during the previous year, and hence, only 10%.
# 3.346 INCOME TAX LAW

(i.e., 50% of 20%) is allowable as additional depreciation in the A.Y.2024-25. The balance additional depreciation would be allowed in the next year. However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter alia, any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee, was used either within or outside India by any other person. Therefore, additional depreciation is not allowable in respect of imported machinery, since it was used in Colombo, before its installation by the assessee.

# 3. Allowability of the expenses incurred by Mr. Manav, a wholesale dealer in commodities, while computing profits and gains from business or profession

# (i) Construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities

Under section 37(1), only expenditure not being in the nature of capital expenditure or personal expense and not covered under sections 30 to 36, and incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business is allowed as a deduction while computing business income. However, any expenditure incurred by an assessee on the activities relating to corporate social responsibility referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall not be deemed to have been incurred for the purpose of business and hence, shall not be allowed as deduction under section 37. Accordingly, the amount of ` 5,60,000 incurred by Mr. Manav, towards construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities shall not be allowed as deduction under section 37.

# (ii) Purchase of building for setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of food grains

Mr. Manav, would be eligible for investment-linked tax deduction under section 35AD, since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The deduction u/s 35AD would be 100% of ` 4,50,000, being the amount invested in purchase of building for setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of food grains which commences operation on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2009 (P.Y.2023-24, in this case).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

Therefore, the deduction under section 35AD while computing business income of such specified business would be ` 4,50,000, if Mr. Manav opts for section 35AD.

(iii) Interest on loan paid to Mr. X (a resident) ` 50,000 on which tax has not been deducted

As per section 194A, Mr. Manav, being an individual is required to deduct tax at source on the amount of interest on loan paid to Mr. X, since his turnover during the previous year 2022-23 exceeds ` 100 lakhs. Therefore, ` 15,000, being 30% of ` 50,000, would be disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) while computing the business income of Mr. Manav for non-deduction of tax at source under section 194A on interest of ` 50,000 paid by it to Mr. X. The balance ` 35,000 would be allowed as deduction under section 36(1)(iii), assuming that the amount was borrowed for the purposes of business.

(iv) Commodities transaction tax of ` 20,000 paid on sale of bullion

Commodities transaction tax paid in respect of taxable commodities transactions entered into in the course of business during the previous year is allowable as deduction, provided the income arising from such taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. Taking that income from this commodities transaction is included while computing the business income of Mr. Manav, the commodity transaction tax of ` 20,000 paid is allowable as deduction under section 36(1)(xvi).

# 4.

(i) True: Section 36(1)(xv) allows a deduction of the amount of securities transaction tax paid by the assessee in respect of taxable securities transactions entered into in the course of business during the previous year as deduction from the business income of a dealer in shares and securities.

(ii) True: As per section 40A(3A), in the case of an assessee following mercantile system of accounting, if an expenditure has been allowed as deduction in any previous year on due basis, and payment exceeding ` 10,000 has been made in the subsequent year otherwise
# 3.348 INCOME TAX LAW

than by an account payee cheque or an account payee bank draft or use of ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay, then, the payment so made shall be deemed to be the income of the subsequent year in which such payment has been made.

1. True: According to the Explanation 5 to section 32(1), allowance of depreciation is mandatory. Therefore, depreciation has to be provided mandatorily while calculating income from business/profession whether or not the assessee has claimed the same while computing his total income.
2. True: Section 36(1)(ib) provides deduction in respect of premium paid by an employer to keep in force an insurance on the health of his employees under a scheme framed in this behalf by GIC or any other insurer. The medical insurance premium can be paid by any mode other than cash, to be eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(ib).
3. False: Expenditure incurred in making payment to the employee in connection with his voluntary retirement either in the year of retirement or in any subsequent year, will be entitled to deduction in 5 equal annual installments beginning from the year in which each payment is made to the employee.
4. False: Additional depreciation can be claimed only in respect of eligible plant and machinery acquired and installed by an assessee engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing or in the business of generation or transmission or distribution of power. In this case, the individual is engaged in trading activities and the new plant has been acquired and installed in a trading concern. Hence, he will not be entitled to claim additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia), even though he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 5.

Not allowable as deduction: As per section 40A(7), no deduction is allowed in computing business income in respect of any provision made by the assessee in his books of account for the payment of gratuity to his employees except in the following two cases:
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.349

1. where any provision is made for the purpose of payment of sum by way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund; or
2. where any provision is made for the purpose of making any payment on account of gratuity that has become payable during the previous year.

Therefore, in the present case, the provision made on the basis of actuarial valuation for payment of gratuity has to be disallowed under section 40A(7), since, no payment has been actually made on account of gratuity.

Note: It is assumed that such provision is not for the purpose of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund.

Allowable as deduction: As per Rule 6DD, in case the payment is made for purchase of agricultural produce directly to the cultivator, grower or producer of such agricultural produce, no disallowance under section 40A(3) is attracted even though the cash payment for the expense exceeds ` 10,000. Therefore, in the given case, disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted since, cash payment for purchase of oil seeds is made directly to the farmer.

Not allowable as deduction: Income-tax of ` 20,000 paid by the employer in respect of non-monetary perquisites provided to its employees is exempt in the hands of the employee under section 10(10CC). As per section 40(a)(v), such income-tax paid by the employer is not deductible while computing business income.

Allowable as deduction: Payment for fire insurance is allowable as deduction under section 36(1). Since payment is made by credit card, which is a prescribed electronic mode, disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted in this case.

Not allowable as deduction: Disallowance under section 40(a)(iii) is attracted in respect of salary payment of ` 10,00,000 outside India by a company without deduction of tax at source.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.350 INCOME TAX LAW

(vi) Allowable as deduction: The limit for attracting disallowance under section 40A(3) for payment otherwise than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode is ` 35,000 in case of payment made for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriage. Therefore, in the present case, disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted for payment of ` 30,000 made in cash to a transporter for carriage of goods.

# 6.

(a) True: In order to escape the disallowance specified in section 40A(3), payment in respect of the business expenditure ought to have been made through an account payee cheque. Payment through a crossed cheque will attract disallowance under section 40A(3).

(b) (i) True: It is mandatory to write off the amount due from a debtor as not receivable in the books of account, in order to claim the same as bad debt under section 36(1)(vii). However, where the debt has been taken into account in computing the income of the assessee on the basis of ICDSs notified under section 145(2), without recording the same in the accounts, then, such debt shall be allowed in the previous year in which such debt becomes irrecoverable and it shall be deemed that such debt or part thereof has been written off as irrecoverable in the accounts for the said purpose.

(ii) True: Section 40(a)(i) provides that failure to deduct tax at source from, inter alia, rent or royalty payable to a non-resident, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, will result in disallowance of such expenditure, where the non-resident payee has not paid the tax due on such income.

# 7. Computation of business income of Mr. Sivam for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Net Profit as per profit and loss account|50,000| |
|Add: Inadmissible expenses/ losses| | |
|Under valuation of closing stock|18,000| |
|Salary paid to brother – unreasonable|2,000|[Section 40A(2)]|
|Printing and stationery - whole amount of|23,200| |

# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.351

printing & stationery paid in cash would be disallowed, since such amount exceeds ` 10,000 [Section 40A(3)]

Depreciation (considered separately) 1,05,000

Short term capital loss on shares 8,100

Donation to public charitable trust 2,000 1,58,300

2,08,300

# Less: Items to be deducted:

Under valuation of opening stock 9,000

Income from UTI [Chargeable under the head “Income from Other Sources] 2,400 11,400

Business income before depreciation 1,96,900

# Less: Depreciation (See Note 1)

66,000

1,30,900

# Computation of business income as per section 44AD:

As per section 44AD, where the amount of turnover is received, inter alia, by way of account payee cheque or use of electronic clearing system through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes, the presumptive business income would be 6% of turnover, i.e., ` 1,12,11,500 x 6 /100 = ` 6,72,690

# Notes:

# 1. Calculation of depreciation

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Opening balance of plant & machinery as on 1.4.2023|4,20,000|
|(i.e. WDV as on 31.3.2023 (-) depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23)| |
|Add: Cost of new plant & machinery|70,000|
| |4,90,000|
|Less: Sale proceeds of assets sold|50,000|
|WDV of the block of plant & machinery as on 31.3.2024|4,40,000|
|Depreciation@15%|66,000|
|No additional depreciation is allowable as the assessee is not engaged in manufacture or production of any article.| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.352 INCOME TAX LAW

Since GST liability has been paid before the due date of filing return of income under section 139(1), the same is deductible.

# 8. Section 44AE

Section 44AE would apply in the case of Mr. Sukhvinder since he is engaged in the business of plying goods carriages and owns not more than ten goods carriages at any time during the previous year. Section 44AE provides for computation of business income of such assesses on a presumptive basis. The income shall be deemed to be ` 1,000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight, as the case may be, per month or part of the month for each heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 per month or part of month for each goods carriage other than heavy goods vehicle, owned by the assessee in the previous year or such higher sum as declared by the assessee in his return of income.

Mr. Sukhvinder’s business income calculated applying the provisions of section 44AE is ` 13,72,500 (See Notes 1 & 2 below) and his total income would be ` 14,42,500.

However, as per section 44AE(7), Mr. Sukhvinder may claim lower profits and gains if he keeps and maintains proper books of account as per section 44AA and gets the same audited and furnishes a report of such audit as required under section 44AB. If he does so, then his income for tax purposes from goods carriages would be ` 4,45,000 instead of ` 13,72,500 and his total income would be ` 5,15,000.

# Notes:

|1.|Computation of total income of Mr. Sukhvinder for A.Y. 2024-25|Presumptive income|Where books are maintained|
|---|---|---|---|
| |Income from business of plying goods carriages [See Note 2 Below]|13,72,500|4,45,000|
| |Other business and non-business income|70,000|70,000|
| |Total Income|14,42,500|5,15,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

# 2. Calculation of presumptive income as per section 44AE

|Type of carriage|No. of months|Rate per ton per month|Ton|Amount| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Heavy goods vehicle|1 goods carriage|2|1,000|30,000| | | |
|5 goods carriage|12|1,000| |9,00,000| | | |
|Goods vehicle other than heavy goods vehicle|1 goods carriage|11|7,500|82,500| | | |
|4 goods carriage|12|7,500| |3,60,000| | | |
|Total|Total|Total|Total|13,72,500| | | |

# 9. Computation of total income of Mr. Raju for the A.Y. 2024-25

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business or profession| |
|Net profit as per profit and loss account|5,00,000|
|Add: Excess commission paid to brother disallowed under section 40A(2)|10,000|
|Disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted since the limit for one time cash payment is ` 35,000 in respect of payment to transport operators. Therefore, amount of ` 33,000 paid in cash to a transport carrier is allowable as deduction.|Nil|
|Salary paid to staff not recorded in the books|48,000|
|(Assuming that the expenditure is in the nature of unexplained expenditure and hence, is deemed to be income as per section 69C| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.354 INCOME TAX LAW

and would be taxable @ 60% under section 115BBE – no deduction allowable in respect of such expenditure) [See Note 1 below]

|Bank term loan interest paid after the due date of filing of return under section 139(1) – disallowed as per section 43B|40,000| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|State GST penalty paid disallowed [See Note 2 below]|5,000| | |
|Depreciation debited to profit and loss account|2,00,000|3,03,000|8,03,000|

Less: Dividend from domestic companies [Chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources”]

15,000
Income from agriculture [Exempt under section 10(1)]

1,80,000
Depreciation under the Income-tax Act, 1961 (As per working note)

2,23,500
4,18,500
3,84,500
# Income from house property

Annual value of self-occupied property

Nil
Less: Deduction u/s 24(b) – interest on housing loan

Nil
Nil
[Not allowable, since Mr. Raju is paying tax as per default tax regime]

# Income from Other Sources

Dividend from domestic companies

15,000
# Gross Total Income

3,99,500
Less: Deduction u/s 80C [Not allowable, since Mr. Raju is paying tax as per default tax regime]

Nil
# Total Income

3,99,500
# Working Note:

Computation of depreciation under the Income-tax Act, 1961

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Depreciation@15% on ` 13.90 lakhs (WDV as on 31.3.2023 less depreciation for P.Y. 2022-23 i.e., ` 11.90 lakh plus assets purchased during the year and used for more than 180 days ` 2 lakh)|2,08,500|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

3.355

|Depreciation @7.5% on ` 2 lakh (Assets used for &lt; 180 days)|15,000|
|---|---|
| |2,23,500|

Since Mr. Raju is paying tax as per default tax regime, additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) would not be available to him.

# Notes (Alternate views):

1. It is also possible to take a view that the salary not recorded in the books of account was an erroneous omission and that the assessee has offered satisfactory explanation for the same. In such a case, the same should not be added back as unexplained expenditure, but would be allowable as deduction while computing profits and gains of business and profession.
2. Where the imposition of penalty is not for delay in payment of sales tax or VAT or GST but for contravention of provisions of the Sales Tax Act or VAT Act or GST Law, the levy is not compensatory and therefore, not deductible. However, if the levy is compensatory in nature, it would be fully allowable. Where it is a composite levy, the portion which is compensatory is allowable and that portion which is penal is to be disallowed.

Since the question only mentions “GST penalty paid” and the reason for levy of penalty is not given, it has been assumed that the levy is not compensatory and therefore, not deductible. It is, however, possible to assume that such levy is compensatory in nature and hence, allowable as deduction. In such a case, the total income would be ` 3,94,500.

# 10.

Where an assessee is engaged in the composite business of growing and curing of coffee, the income will be segregated between agricultural income and business income, as per Rule 7B of the Income-tax Rules, 1962. As per the above Rule, income derived from sale of coffee grown and cured by the seller in India shall be computed as if it were income derived from business, and 25% of such income shall be deemed to be income liable to tax. The balance 75% will be treated as agricultural income.

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Sale value of cured coffee|22,00,000| |
|Less: Expenses for growing coffee|3,10,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.356 INCOME TAX LAW

|Car expenses (80% of ` 50,000)|40,000|
|---|---|
|Depreciation on car (80% of 15% of ` 3,00,000) [See Computation below]|36,000|
|Total cost of agricultural operations|3,86,000|
|Expenditure on coffee curing operations|3,00,000|
|Add: Depreciation on machinery (15% of ` 15,00,000) [See Computation below]|2,25,000|
|Total cost of the curing operations|5,25,000|
|Total cost of composite operations|9,11,000|
|Total profits from composite activities|12,89,000|
|Business income (25% of above)|3,22,250|
|Agricultural income (75% of above)|9,66,750|

# Computation of depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Car| | |
|Opening balance as on 1.4.2023 (i.e., WDV as on 31.3.2023 (-) depreciation for P.Y.2022-23)|3,00,000| |
|Depreciation thereon at 15%|45,000| |
|Less: Disallowance @20% for personal use|9,000| |
|Depreciation actually allowed|36,000| |
|Machinery| | |
|Opening balance as on 1.4.2023 (i.e., WDV as on 31.3.2023 (-) depreciation for P.Y.2022-23)|15,00,000| |
|Depreciation @ 15% for P.Y. 2023-24| |2,25,000|

Explanation 7 to section 43(6) provides that in cases of ‘composite income’, for the purpose of computing written down value of assets acquired before the previous year, the total amount of depreciation shall be computed as if the entire composite income of the assessee (and not just 25%) is chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. The depreciation so computed shall be deemed to have been “actually allowed” to the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.358 INCOME TAX LAW

# UNIT – 4 : CAPITAL GAINS

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to –

- comprehend the scope of income chargeable under this head;
- comprehend and identify the assets classified as “capital assets” for the purposes of chargeability under this head;
- comprehend the meaning of short-term capital asset and long-term capital asset;
- compute the period of holding for determining whether an asset is a short-term capital asset or long-term capital asset;
- identify the transactions to be considered as transfer for the purpose of capital gains;
- identify the transactions not regarded as transfer;
- compute the capital gains from transfer of capital assets in the manner prescribed;
- determine the cost of acquisition and indexed cost of acquisition, in case of long term capital asset for the purpose of computing the capital gains;
- compute capital gains in case of depreciable assets;
- compute capital gains in case of market linked debentures and other specified securities;
- compute capital gains in case of slump sale;
- compute the exemption available for investment of capital gains/net consideration on transfer of certain assets;
- compute the capital gains chargeable to tax after deducting the exemptions available in respect of capital gains;
- appreciate the concessional tax treatment available for short-term capital gains and for long term capital gains on transfer of listed equity shares/units of an equity oriented fund;
- compute the tax liability applying the special rates of tax on long-term capital gains and short-term capital gains and the normal rates of tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# Proforma for computation of income under the head “Capital Gains”

|Particulars|Amt (`)|Amt (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer|xxx| |
|Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)|xxx| |
|(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)| | |
|Net Sale Consideration|xxx| |
|-term capital asset (STCA)| | |
|Less: Cost of acquisition (COA) [Refer table at page 3.464]|xxx| |
|Cost of improvement (COI) [Refer table at page 3.466]|xxx| |
|Short-term capital gain (STCG)|xxx| |
|Less: Exemption under sections 54B/54D|xxx| |
|In case of a Short| | |
|Short-term capital gain chargeable to tax|xxx| |
|In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024| | |
|Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer|xxx| |
|Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)|xxx| |
|(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)| | |
|Net Sale Consideration|xxx| |
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (ICOA)|xxx| |
|Cost of acquisition| | |
|CII for the year in which the asset is transferred| | |
|CII for the year in which the asset was first held by the assessee or P.Y. 2001-02, whichever is later| | |
|Less: Indexed cost of improvement (ICOI)|xxx| |
|CII for the year in which the asset is transferred| | |
|In case of a Long-term capital asset (LTCA)| | |
|Cost of improvement| | |
|CII for the year in which the improvement took place| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.360 INCOME TAX LAW

Long-term capital gains (LTCG) xxx

Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xxx

[Refer Table at pages 3.468-3.470]

Long-term capital gains chargeable to tax xxx

In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024

Full value of consideration received or accruing as a xxx

result of transfer

Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in xxx

connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)

(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)

Net Sale Consideration xxx

Less: Cost of acquisition (COA) [Refer table at page 3.464] xxx

Less: Cost of improvement (COI) [Refer table at page xxx 3.466]

Long-term capital gains (LTCG) xxx

Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xxx

[Refer Table at pages 3.468-3.470]

Long-term capital gains chargeable to tax xxx

# Rate of tax on Short-term Capital Gains (STCG)

|Section|Rate of tax|
|---|---|
|• STCG arising on transfer of listed equity shares, units of equity-oriented fund and unit of business trust¹ - STT should have been paid on such sale.| |
|If transfer takes place|Rate of tax|
|111A Before 23.7.2024|15%|
|On or after 23.7.2024|20%|
|• STCG arising from transaction undertaken in foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 15% or 20%, as the case may be, even though STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.| |

1The provisions relating to business trust would be dealt at Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.361

Note - STCG arising on transfer of other Short-term Capital Assets would be chargeable at normal rates of tax.

# Rates of tax on Long-term Capital Gains (LTCG)

|Section|Rate of tax|
|---|---|
|112A|- LTCG exceeding ` 1,25,000 would be taxable
- @10%, if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
- @12.5%, if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
on the transfer of following long-term capital assets - - listed equity shares, if STT has been paid on acquisition and transfer of such shares
- units of equity-oriented fund and unit of business trust, if STT has been paid on transfer of such units
- Total exemption in a previous year cannot exceed ` 1.25 lakhs.
- If such transaction is undertaken on a recognized stock exchange located in an IFSC, LTCG would be taxable at a concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be, where the consideration for transfer is received or receivable in foreign currency, even though STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.
- Benefit of indexation and currency fluctuation would not be available.
|
|112|Long-term capital asset (LTCA)|
|If transfer takes place before 23.7.2024|Unlisted securities, or Non-corporate non-resident/foreign shares of a closely held company - 10% without the benefit of indexation and foreign currency fluctuation|
|Other Assessees – 20% with indexation benefit| |
|Listed securities (other than a unit) or a zero-coupon bond - 10% without indexation or - 20% with indexation benefit whichever is more beneficial to the assesse| |
|Other Assets (other than taxable u/s 112A) - 20% with indexation benefit| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.362 INCOME TAX LAW

If transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024

|Land or building or both|Individual or HUF, being a resident –|if acquired before 23.7.2024|12.5% without indexation or 20% with indexation benefit, whichever is more beneficial to the assessee|
|---|---|---|---|
| |Other Assessees –| |12.5% without indexation|
|- Land or building or both|if acquired on or after 23.7.2024| |12.5% without indexation|
| |[In case of non-residents, LTCG on transfer of unlisted securities, or shares of a closely held company, would be taxable @12.5% without indexation and foreign currency fluctuation]| | |
|- Other Assets (other than taxable u/s 112A)| | | |

# Notes:

- In case of a resident individual or a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), the LTCG taxable u/s 112 or 112A or STCG taxable u/s 111A shall be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and the balance shall be subject to tax.
- In respect of bonds or debentures (whether listed or unlisted) transferred before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed accordingly. If unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred on or after 23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the holding period. Indexation benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures, even if transferred before 23.07.2024.
- No deduction under Chapter VI-A can be claimed in respect of such LTCG chargeable to tax u/s 112 or u/s 112A or STCG chargeable to tax u/s 111A.
- Rebate u/s 87A is not available in respect of tax payable on LTCG u/s 112A.
- In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime, enhanced surcharge of 25% would not be levied on dividend income, STCG taxable u/s 111A and LTCG taxable u/s 112 and u/s 112A.
- In case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC, enhanced surcharge of 25% or 37% would not be levied on dividend income, STCG taxable u/s 111A and LTCG taxable u/s 112 and u/s 112A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.363

# Period of holding [Section 2(42A)]

[In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024]

|STCA, if held for|≤ 12 months|• Security (other than unit) listed in a recognized stock exchange|
|---|---|---|
|LTCA, if held for|> 12 months|• Unit of equity oriented fund/unit of UTI|
|STCA, if held for|≤ 24 months|• Unlisted shares|
|LTCA, if held for|> 24 months|• Land or building or both|
|STCA, if held for|≤ 36 months|• Unlisted securities other than shares|
|LTCA, if held for|> 36 months|• Other capital assets|

[In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024]

|STCA, if held for|≤ 12 months|• Security listed in a recognized stock exchange|
|---|---|---|
|LTCA, if held for|> 12 months|• Unit of equity oriented fund/UTI|
|STCA, if held for|≤ 24 months|• Other capital assets|
|LTCA, if held for|> 24 months| |

Note – It is to be noted that as per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer of the following assets would always be capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets:

- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.364 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.1 INTRODUCTION

Section 45 provides that any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year will be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Capital Gains’. Such capital gains will be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place. In this charging section, two terms are important. One is “capital asset” and the other is “transfer”. Hence, in this unit on capital gains, we begin our discussion with the definition of “capital asset” and “transfer”. Thereafter, we will proceed to discuss the various circumstances under which capital gains tax is levied. There are certain transactions which are not to be regarded as transfer for the purposes of capital gains. These transactions have also been discussed in this chapter. There is a separate method of computation of capital gains in respect of depreciable assets. Also, there are exemptions in cases where capital gains are invested in specified assets. All these aspects are being discussed in this unit.

# 4.2 CAPITAL ASSET

Definition: According to section 2(14), a capital asset means –

- (a) property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession.
- (b) any securities held by a Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested in such securities in accordance with the SEBI regulations.
- (c) any unit linked insurance policy (ULIP) issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of premium payable exceeding ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such policy.

In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such ULIPs exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such ULIP(s), the exemption under section 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of those ULIPs (at the option of the assessee) whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during their term. All other ULIPs would be capital assets.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.365

Note – Provisions relating to taxability or otherwise of ULIPs issued on or after 1.2.2021 are not being made applicable at Intermediate level. Accordingly, section 45(1B) has been excluded by way of Study Guidelines. Consequently, reference to such ULIPs has not been made in the discussion of section 10(10D) and in the definition of equity oriented fund for the purpose of section 111A and 112A in the Study Material.

However, it does not include—

1. Stock-in trade: Any stock-in-trade [other than securities referred to in (b) above], consumable stores or raw materials held for the purpose of the business or profession of the assessee; Whether a particular asset is stock-in-trade or capital asset does not depend upon the nature of the item, but the manner in which the same is held. The item would be stock-in-trade in the hands of the assessee who deals or trades in that item; however, the same item would be capital asset for the assessee who holds it as an investment.

Example: A dealer in real estate holds a piece of land as stock-in-trade. But the same will be capital asset for an assessee who holds it as an investment. The exclusion of stock-in-trade from the definition of capital asset is only in respect of sub-clause (a) above and not sub-clause (b). This implies that even if the nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is stock in trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on transfer would be taxable as capital gains. Further, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance (No.2) Bill, 2014 clarifies that the income arising from transfer of such security by a Foreign Portfolio Investor (FPI) would be in the nature of capital gain, irrespective of the presence or otherwise in India, of the Fund manager managing the investments of the assessee.
2. Personal effects: Personal effects, that is to say, movable property (including wearing apparel and furniture) held for personal use by the assessee or any member of his family dependent on him.

# EXCLUSIONS:

- jewellery;
- archaeological collections;
- drawings;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.366 INCOME TAX LAW

(d) paintings;

(e) sculptures; or

(f) any work of art.

# Definition of Jewellery

Jewellery is a capital asset and the profits or gains arising from the transfer of jewellery held for personal use are chargeable to tax under the head “capital gains”. For this purpose, the expression ‘jewellery’ includes the following:

- (i) Ornaments made of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal or any alloy containing one or more of such precious metals, whether or not containing any precious or semi-precious stones and whether or not worked or sewn into any wearing apparel;
- (ii) Precious or semi-precious stones, whether or not set in any furniture, utensil or other article or worked or sewn into any wearing apparel.

# Rural Agricultural Land

(iii) Rural agricultural land in India i.e., agricultural land in India which is not situated in any specified area.

As per the definition, only rural agricultural lands in India are excluded from the purview of the term ‘capital asset’. Hence urban agricultural lands constitute capital assets. Accordingly, the agricultural land described in (a) and (b) below, being land situated within the specified urban limits, would fall within the definition of “capital asset”, and transfer of such land would attract capital gains tax -

- (a) agricultural land situated in any area within the jurisdiction of a municipality or cantonment board having population of not less than ten thousand, or
- (b) agricultural land situated in any area within such distance, measured aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown hereunder -

|Shortest aerial distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board referred to in item (a)|Population according to the last preceding census of which relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year.|
|---|---|
|(i) ≤ 2 kms|> 10,000|
|(ii) > 2 kms but ≤ 6 kms|> 1,00,000|
|(iii) > 6 kms but ≤ 8 kms|> 10,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

|Area|Shortest distance from the local limits of a municipality or cantonment board referred to in item (a)|Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year.|Is the land situated in this area a capital asset?|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) A|1 km|9,000|No|
|(ii) B|1.5 kms|12,000|Yes|
|(iii) C|2 kms|11,00,000|Yes|
|(iv) D|3 kms|80,000|No|
|(v) E|4 kms|3,00,000|Yes|
|(vi) F|5 kms|12,00,000|Yes|
|(vii) G|6 kms|8,000|No|
|(viii) H|7 kms|4,00,000|No|
|(ix) I|8 kms|10,50,000|Yes|
|(x) J|9 kms|15,00,000|No|

Explanation regarding gains arising on the transfer of urban agricultural land – Explanation 1 to section 2(1A) clarifies that capital gains arising from transfer of any agricultural land situated in any non-rural area (as explained above) will not constitute agricultural revenue within the meaning of section 2(1A).

In other words, the capital gains arising from the transfer of such urban agricultural land would not be treated as agricultural income for the purpose of exemption u/s 10(1). Hence, such gains would be subject to u/s 45.

(iv) Specified Gold Bonds: 6½% Gold Bonds, 1977, or 7% Gold Bonds, 1980, or National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, issued by the Central Government;

(v) Special Bearer Bonds, 1991 issued by the Central Government;

(vi) Gold Deposit Bonds issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates issued under the Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2015 and Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2019 notified by the Central Government.

Note – ‘Property’ includes and shall be deemed to have always included any rights in or in relation to an Indian company, including rights of management or control or any other rights whatsoever.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 3.368

# 368

|Bonds|Certificates|
|---|---|
|Gold|Gold by|
|1999/|Scheme,|
|invested in such securities as per SEBI|Any securities held by a FII which has|

# 4.

|Scheme,|notified|
|---|---|
|Any work of art|under the Central Govt.|

|Deposit|Monetisation|
|---|---|
|Deposit|issued|
|issued 2015|Gold|

# CAPITAL ASSET

[Section 2(14)]

|Bonds,|Gold Bonds, 1980,|
|---|---|
|Bonds, 1991 issued|by the Central Govt.|

|Gold|Bearer|
|---|---|
|Defence|or Sculptures|
|7%|Paintings|

|Gold|National|
|---|---|
|Bonds,|Special|
|6½ 1977,|Agricultural|
|Rural Land|EXCLUSIONS FROM PERSONAL EFFECTS|

personal use by the

|wearing apparel and|including|
|---|---|
|movable for his|Personal Effects|

logical collections

|Property of any kind held by an|assessee, whether or not connected|
|---|---|
|with his business or profession|furniture|

Archae

|EXCLUSIONS|raw|
|---|---|
|trade, held|consumable|
|profession|materials|
|in|stores,|
|Stock| |

# CAPITAL GAINS

3.369

# 4.3 SHORT TERM AND LONG TERM CAPITAL ASSETS

• Definition: As per section 2(42A), short-term capital asset means a capital asset held by an assessee for not more than 36 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer. However, w.e.f. 23.7.2024, a capital asset will be a short-term capital asset if it is held by an assessee for not more than 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer. As per section 2(29A), long-term capital asset means a capital asset which is not a short-term capital asset. Accordingly, based on the period of holding capital assets would be classified as short-term or long-term capital asset as follows:

|Capital Asset|STCG, if held for|LTCG, if held for|
|---|---|---|
|In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024| | |
|• Security (other than unit) listed in a recognized stock exchange|≤ 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|> 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|• Unit of equity oriented fund/unit of UTI| | |
|• Zero Coupon bond| | |
|• Unlisted shares|≤ 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|> 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|• Land or building or both|immediately preceding the date of its transfer|immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|• Unlisted securities other than shares|≤ 36 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|> 36 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|• Other capital assets|immediately preceding the date of its transfer|immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024| | |
|• Security listed in a recognized stock exchange|≤ 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|> 12 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer|
|• Unit of equity-oriented fund/unit of UTI| | |
|• Zero Coupon bond| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.370 INCOME TAX LAW

|Other capital assets|≤ 24 months|> 24 months|
|---|---|---|
|immediately preceding the date of its transfer|immediately preceding the date of its transfer| |

Note – As per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer of the following assets would always be capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets -

- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024.

# Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Equity oriented fund|A fund set up under a scheme of a mutual fund2 and|
| |(i) in a case where the fund invested in the units of another fund which is traded on a recognised stock exchange –|
| |I. a minimum of 90% of the total proceeds of such fund is invested in the units of such other fund; and|
| |II. such other fund also invests a minimum of 90% of its total proceeds in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange; and|
| |(ii) in any other case, a minimum of 65% of the total proceeds of such fund is invested in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange.|
| |However, the percentage of equity shareholding or unit held in respect of the fund, as the case may be, shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the monthly averages of the opening and closing figures.|

Specified under section 10(23D)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

Zero Coupon Bond [Section 2(48)]

A bond issued by any infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund³ or a public sector company or a scheduled bank on or after 1ˢᵗ June, 2005,

- in respect of which no payment and benefit is received or receivable before maturity or redemption from such issuing entity and
- which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.

Note: The income from transfer of a zero-coupon bond (not being held as stock-in-trade) is to be treated as capital gains. Section 2(47)(iva) provides that maturity or redemption of a zero coupon bond shall be treated as a transfer for the purposes of capital gains tax.

# Determination of period of holding

[Clause (i) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A)]: In determining period of holding of any capital asset by the assessee in the circumstances stated in column (1), the period shall be determined by considering the period specified in Column (2).

|S. No.|Circumstances (Column 1)|Period of holding (Column 2)|
|---|---|---|
|1|Where shares held in a company in liquidation|The period subsequent to the date of liquidation of company shall be excluded.|
|2|Where asset becomes the property of an assessee by virtue of section 49(1)|The period for which the capital asset was held by the previous owner shall be included.|
|3|Where inventory of business is converted into or treated as a capital asset by the assesse|Period from the date of conversion or treatment as a capital asset shall be considered.|
|4|Where share/s in the Indian company (amalgamated company), becomes the property of an assessee in lieu of|The period for which the share(s) was held by the assessee in the amalgamating company shall be included.|

Infrastructure debt fund notified by Central Government under section 10(47)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.372 INCOME TAX LAW

Where the share or any other security is subscribed by the assessee on the basis of right to subscribe to any share or security or by the person in whose favour such right is renounced by the assessee.

5 Where the share or any other security is subscribed by the assessee on the basis of right to subscribe to any share or security or by the person in whose favour such right is renounced by the assessee.

6 Where the right to subscribe to any share or security is renounced in favour of any other person.

7 Where any financial asset is allotted without any payment and on the basis of holding of any other financial asset.

8 Where share/s in the Indian company being a resulting company becomes the property of an assessee in consideration of demerger.

9 Where equity share in a company becomes the property of the assessee by way of conversion of preference shares into equity shares referred under section 47(xb).

10 (i) Where Electronic Gold Receipt is issued by a Vault Manager in respect of gold deposited [Conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt as referred to in section 47(viid)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

(ii) Where gold is released in respect of an Electronic Gold Receipt [Conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt into gold as referred to in section 47(viid)]

3.373

# 11

Where any specified security or sweat equity shares is allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the employer free of cost or at concessional rate to his employees (including former employees)

“Sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by a company to its employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than cash for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called.

• Period of holding in respect of other capital assets - The period for which any capital asset is held by the assessee shall be determined in accordance with any rules made by the CBDT in this behalf. Accordingly, the CBDT has inserted Rule 8AA in the Income-tax Rules, 1962 to provide for method of determination of period of holding of capital assets, other than the capital assets mentioned in clause (i) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A).

Specifically, in the case of a capital asset, being a share or debenture of a company, which becomes the property of the assessee in the circumstances mentioned in section 47(x), there shall be included the period for which the bond, debenture, debenture-stock or deposit certificate, as the case may be, was held by the assessee prior to the conversion.

Note: Section 47(x) provides that any transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture-stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that company shall not be regarded as transfer for the purposes of levy of capital gains tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.4 TRANSFER: WHAT IT MEANS? [SECTION 2(47)]

Section 2(47) contains an inclusive definition of the term ‘transfer’. Accordingly, transfer in relation to a capital asset includes the following types of transactions—

1. the sale, exchange or relinquishment of the asset; or
2. the extinguishment of any rights therein; or
3. the compulsory acquisition thereof under any law; or

Example: Acquisition of industrial undertaking under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.

the owner of a capital asset may convert the same into the stock-in-trade of a business carried on by him. Such conversion is treated as transfer; or

Example: Where an investor in shares starts a business of dealing in shares and treats existing investments as stock-in-trade of the newly set up business, such conversion shall be regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains.

the maturity or redemption of a zero-coupon bond; or
Part-performance of the contract: Sometimes, possession of an immovable property is given in consideration of part-performance of a contract.

Example: A enters into an agreement for the sale of his house. The purchaser gives the entire sale consideration to A. A hands over complete rights of possession to the purchaser since he has received the entire sale consideration. Under the Income-tax Act, the above transaction is considered as transfer.

Lastly, there are certain types of transactions which have the effect of transferring or enabling the enjoyment of an immovable property.

Example: A person may become a member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons which may be building houses/flats. When he pays an agreed amount, the society etc. hands over possession of the house to the person concerned. No conveyance is registered. For the purpose of income-tax, the above transaction is a transfer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.375

# ILLUSTRATION 1

How will you calculate the period of holding in case of the following assets?

1. Shares held in a company in liquidation
2. Bonus shares
3. Flat in a co-operative society

# SOLUTION

1. Shares held in a company in liquidation - The period after the date on which the company goes into liquidation shall be excluded while calculating the period of holding. Therefore, the period of holding shall commence from the date of acquisition and end with the date on which the company goes into liquidation.
2. Bonus shares - The period of holding shall be reckoned from the date of allotment of bonus shares and will end with the date of transfer.
3. Flat in a co-operative society - The period of holding shall be reckoned from the date of allotment of shares in the society and will end with the date of transfer.

Note – Any transaction whether by way of becoming a member of, or acquiring shares in, a co-operative society or by way of any agreement or any arrangement or in any other manner whatsoever which has the effect of transferring, or enabling enjoyment of, any immovable property is a transfer as per section 2(47)(vi). Hence, it is possible to take a view that any date from which such right is obtained may be taken as the date of acquisition.

# 4.5 SCOPE AND YEAR OF CHARGEABILITY

# [SECTION 45]

(i) General Provision [Section 45(1)]

Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year (other than exemptions covered under this chapter) shall be chargeable to income-tax under this head in the previous year in which the transfer took place.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.376 INCOME TAX LAW

Year of chargeability - Capital gains are chargeable as the income of the previous year in which the sale or transfer takes place. In other words, for determining the year of chargeability, the relevant date of transfer is not the date of the agreement to sell, but the actual date of sale i.e., the date on which the effect of transfer of title to the property as contemplated by the parties has taken place4.

However, as already noted, Income-tax Act has recognised certain transactions as transfer in spite of the fact that conveyance deed might not have been executed and registered. Power of Attorney sales as explained above or co-operative society transactions for acquisition of house are examples in this regard.

# (ii) Insurance Receipts [Section 45(1A)]

Where any person receives any money or other assets under any insurance from an insurer on account of damage to or destruction of any capital asset, as a result of:

- flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or other convulsion of nature,
- riot or civil disturbance,
- accidental fire or explosion or
- of action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy (whether with or without declaration of war),

then, any profits or gains arising from receipt of such money or other assets shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” and shall be deemed to be the income of such person for the previous year in which such money or other asset was received.

Full value of consideration: In order to compute capital gains, the value of any money or the fair market value of other assets on the date of such receipt shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital assets.

# (iii) Conversion or treatment of a capital asset as stock-in-trade [Section 45(2)]

A person who is the owner of a capital asset may convert the same or treat it as stock-in-trade of the business carried on by him. As noted above, the above transaction is a transfer.

4Alapati Venkatramiah v. CIT [1965] 57 ITR 185 (SC)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

As per section 45(2), notwithstanding anything contained in section 45(1), being the charging section, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion or treatment will be chargeable to income-tax as his income of the previous year in which such stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred by him.

# Full value of consideration:

In order to compute the capital gains, the fair market value of the asset on the date of such conversion or treatment shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.

|Components of income arising on sale of stock-in-trade|Manner of Computation of capital gains and business income|
|---|---|
|Capital Gains|FMV on the date of conversion (-) Cost/Indexed Cost of acquisition/improvement|
|Conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade|Indexation benefit would be considered in relation to the year of conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade|
|Business Income|Sale price of stock-in-trade (-) FMV on the date of conversion|

Note – Both Capital Gains and Business income are chargeable to tax in the year in which stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

A is the owner of a car. On 1-4-2024, he starts a business of purchase and sale of motor cars. He treats the above car as part of the stock-in-trade of his new business. He sells the same on 31-3-2025 and gets a profit of ` 1 lakh. Discuss the tax implication in his hands under the head “Capital gains”.

# SOLUTION

Since car is a personal asset, conversion or treatment of the same as the stock-in-trade.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.378 INCOME TAX LAW

trade of his business will not be trapped by the provisions of section 45(2). Hence, A is not liable to capital gains tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

X converts his capital asset (acquired on June 10, 2006 for ` 60,000) into stock-in-trade on March 10, 2024. The fair market value on the date of the above conversion was ` 5,50,000. He subsequently sells the stock-in-trade so converted for ` 6,00,000 on June 10, 2024. Discuss the year of chargeability of capital gain and business income.

# SOLUTION

Since the capital asset is converted into stock-in-trade during the previous year 2023-24 relevant to the A.Y. 2024-25, it will be a transfer u/s 2(47) during the P.Y. 2023-24. However, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion will be chargeable to tax during the A.Y. 2025-26, since the stock-in-trade has been sold only on June 10, 2024. For this purpose, the fair market value on the date of such conversion (i.e. 10ᵗʰ March, 2024) will be the full value of consideration for computation of capital gains. The capital gains would be computed by reducing the indexed cost of acquisition therefrom, since the transfer (i.e., conversion of capital asset into stock in trade) took place during the P.Y. 2023-24. The business income of ` 50,000 (i.e., ` 6,00,000 (-) ` 5,50,000, being the fair market value on the date of conversion) would also be taxable in the A.Y.2025-26. Thus, both capital gains and business income would be chargeable to tax in the A.Y.2025-26.

# (iv) Compensation on compulsory acquisition [Section 45(5)]

Sometimes, a building or some other capital asset belonging to a person is taken over by the Central Government by way of compulsory acquisition. In that case, the consideration for the transfer is determined by the Central Government of RBI. When the Central Government pays the above compensation, capital gains may arise. Such capital gains are chargeable as income of the previous year in which such compensation is received.

Enhanced Compensation - Many times, persons whose capital assets have been taken over by the Central Government and who get compensation from the Government go to the Court of law for enhancement of compensation. If the court awards a compensation which is higher than the original compensation, the difference thereof will be chargeable to capital gains in the year in which the same is received from the government.

Cost of acquisition in case of enhanced compensation - For this purpose, the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement shall be taken to be nil.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

Compensation received in pursuance of an interim order deemed as income chargeable to tax in the year of final order - In order to remove the uncertainty regarding the year in which the amount of compensation received in pursuance of an interim order of the Court, Tribunal or other authority is to be charged to tax, it is provided that such compensation shall be deemed to be income chargeable under the head ‘Capital gains’ in the previous year in which the final order of such Court, Tribunal or other authority is made.

Reduction of enhanced compensation - Where capital gain has been charged on the compensation received by the assessee for the compulsory acquisition of any capital asset or enhanced compensation received by the assessee and subsequently such compensation is reduced by any Court, Tribunal or any authority, the assessed capital gain of that year shall be recomputed by taking into consideration the reduced amount. This re-computation shall be done by way of rectification5.

Death of the transferor - It is possible that the transferor may die before he receives the enhanced compensation. In that case, the enhanced compensation will be chargeable to tax in the hands of the person who receives the same.

# 4.6 CAPITAL GAINS ON DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS BY COMPANIES IN LIQUIDATION [SECTION 46]

(1) In the hands of liquidated company: Where the assets of a company are distributed to its shareholders on its liquidation, such distribution shall not be regarded as a transfer by the company for the purposes of section 45 [Section 46(1)].

The above section is restricted in its application to the circumstances mentioned therein i.e., the assets of the company must be distributed in specie to shareholders on the liquidation of the company. If, however, the liquidator sells the assets of the company resulting in a capital gain and distributes the funds so collected, the company will be liable to pay tax on such gains.

5 under section 155

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.380 INCOME TAX LAW

(2) In the hands of shareholders: Shareholders receive money or other assets from the company on its liquidation. They will be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘capital gains’ in respect of the market value of the assets received on the date of distribution, or the moneys so received by them. The portion of the distribution which is attributable to the accumulated profits of the company is to be treated as dividend income under section 2(22)(c), which would be taxable in the hands of shareholders. The same will be deducted from the amount received/fair market value for the purpose of determining the consideration for computation of capital gains.

# Capital Gains on distribution of assets by companies in liquidation [Section 46]

|In the hands of|In the hands of|
|---|---|
|the company|shareholders|
|[Section 46(1)]|[Section 46(2)]|
|Distribution is not a transfer|Distribution attributable to accumulated profits of the company|
|No capital gains tax liability|Money received (+)|
| |FMV of assets distributed (-) deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(c)|
| |Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(c)|
|Taxable in the hands of shareholders as “Income from Other Sources”|Full value of consideration for the purpose of section 48|
| |To be considered for computing Capital Gains in the hands of shareholders|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.7 CAPITAL GAINS ON BUYBACK OF SHARES OR SPECIFIED SECURITIES [SECTION 46A]

(1) In case of shares of a company other than a domestic company and specified securities: Any consideration received by a holder of specified securities (other than shares of a domestic company) from any company on purchase of its specified securities is chargeable to tax in the hands of the holder of specified securities. The difference between the cost of acquisition and the value of consideration received by the holder of securities is chargeable to tax as capital gains in his hands. The computation of capital gains shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 48. Such capital gains shall be chargeable in the year in which such securities were purchased by the company. For this purpose, “specified securities” shall have the same meaning as given in Explanation to section 77A of the Companies Act, 19566. As far as shares are concerned, this provision would be attracted in the hands of the shareholder only if the shares are bought back by a company, other than a domestic company.

(2) In case of buy back of shares effected before 1.10.2024 by domestic companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) before 1.10.2024 by a domestic company, additional income-tax @20% (plus surcharge @12% and cess @4%) is leviable in the hands of the company7. Consequently, the income arising to the shareholders in respect of such buyback of shares by the domestic company is exempt under section 10(34A), since the domestic company is liable to pay additional income-tax on the buyback of shares.

(3) In case of buy back of shares effected on or after 1.10.2024 by domestic companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) on or after 1.10.2024 by a domestic company, the sum paid by a domestic company for purchase of its own shares would be treated as dividend and taxable under

6 Now section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013

7 Under section 115QA

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.382 INCOME TAX LAW

the head “Income from Other Sources” in the hands of shareholders. No deduction for expenses would be available against such dividend income. Consequently, as per section 46A, value of consideration received by a shareholder on buy back of shares by a domestic company would be Nil and the difference between the cost of acquisition and the value of consideration received by the shareholder will result into capital loss. The same can be set off and carried forward as per the applicable set-off & carry forward provisions of the Act. If it is long-term capital loss, it can be set-off only against long-term capital gains. If it is a short-term capital loss, it can set-off against both long term capital gains and short term capital gains. For details, refer Chapter: 5: Aggregation of income, Set-off and Carry Forward of Losses.

# 4.8 TRANSACTIONS NOT REGARDED AS TRANSFER [SECTION 47]

Section 47 specifies certain transactions which will not be regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains tax:

1. Total or partial partition of a HUF: Any distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of a HUF [Section 47(i)].
2. A gift or will or an irrevocable trust by individual or HUF: Any transfer of a capital asset by an individual or HUF under a gift or will or an irrevocable trust [Section 47(iii)].
3. Note – Upto A.Y. 2024-25, transfer of a capital asset (other than shares, debentures or warrants allotted by a company under any ESOP) under a gift or will or irrevocable trust by any person was not considered as a transfer.

Transfer of capital asset by holding company to its wholly owned Indian subsidiary company: Any transfer of capital asset by a company to its subsidiary company [Section 47(iv)].

Conditions:

1. The parent company or its nominee must hold the whole of the shares of the subsidiary company; and
2. The subsidiary company must be an Indian company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.383

# (4)

Transfer of capital asset by a subsidiary company to its 100% holding company, being an Indian company: Any transfer of capital asset by a subsidiary company to the holding company [Section 47(v)].

# Conditions:

1. The whole of shares of the subsidiary company must be held by the holding company; and
2. The holding company must be an Indian company.

Exception - The exemption mentioned in 3 or 4 above will not apply if a capital asset is transferred as stock-in-trade.

# (5)

Transfer of capital asset by amalgamating company to amalgamated Indian company, in a scheme of amalgamation: Any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated company if the amalgamated company is an Indian company [Section 47(vi)].

# (6)

Transfer of capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting Indian company, in a scheme of demerger: Any transfer in a demerger, of a capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting company, if the resulting company is an Indian company [Section 47(vib)].

# (7)

Transfer or issue of shares by a resulting company, in a scheme of demerger: Any transfer or issue of shares by the resulting company, in a scheme of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged company, if the transfer is made in consideration of the demerger of the undertaking [Section 47(vid)].

# (8)

Transfer of shares by a shareholder in a scheme of amalgamation: Any transfer by a shareholder, in a scheme of amalgamation, of shares held by him in the amalgamating company [Section 47(vii)].

# Conditions:

1. The transfer is made in consideration of the allotment to him of any share/s in the amalgamated company, except where the shareholder itself is the amalgamated company;
2. The amalgamated company is an Indian company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.384 INCOME TAX LAW

Example: Let us take a case where A Ltd., an Indian company, holds 60% of shares in B Ltd. B Ltd. amalgamates with A Ltd. Since A Ltd. itself is the shareholder of B Ltd., A Ltd., being the amalgamated company, cannot issue shares to itself. However, A Ltd. has to issue shares to the other shareholders of B Ltd.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

M held 2000 shares in a company ABC Ltd., an Indian company. This company amalgamated with another Indian company XYZ Ltd. during the previous year ending 31-3-2025. Under the scheme of amalgamation, M was allotted 1000 shares in the new company. The market value of shares allotted is higher by ₹ 50,000 than the value of holding in ABC Ltd. The Assessing Officer proposes to treat the transaction as an exchange and to tax ₹ 50,000 as capital gain. Is he justified?

# SOLUTION

In the above example, the transaction is squarely covered by the exemption explained above and the proposal of the Assessing Officer to treat the transaction as a transfer is not justified.

1. Transfer of Government Security outside India by a non-resident to another non-resident: Any transfer of a capital asset, being a Government Security carrying a periodic payment of interest, made outside India through an intermediary dealing in settlement of securities, by a non-resident to another non-resident [Section 47(viib)]
2. Redemption of sovereign gold bonds by an Individual: Redemption by an individual of sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI under the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme, 2015 [Section 47(viic)]
3. Conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt or vice versa: Any transfer of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt into gold [Section 47(viid)]
4. Transfer of specified capital asset to the Government or university etc.: Any transfer of any of the following capital asset to the Government or to the University or the National Museum, National Art Gallery, National Archives or any other public museum or institution notified by the Central
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.385

Government to be of national importance or to be of renown throughout any State

1. work of art
2. archaeological, scientific or art collection
3. book
4. manuscript
5. drawing
6. painting
7. photograph or
8. print [Section 47(ix)].

(13) Transfer on conversion of bonds or debentures etc. into shares or debentures: Any transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that company [Section 47(x)].

(14) Conversion of preference shares into equity shares: Any transfer by way of conversion of preference shares of a company into equity shares of that company [Section 47(xb)].

(15) Transfer of capital asset under Reverse Mortgage: Any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government [Section 47(xvi)].

The Reverse Mortgage scheme is for the benefit of senior citizens, who own a residential house property. In order to supplement their existing income, they can mortgage their house property with a scheduled bank or housing finance company, in return for a lump-sum amount or for a regular monthly/quarterly/annual income. The senior citizens can continue to live in the house and receive regular income, without the botheration of having to pay back the loan.

The loan will be given up to, say, 60% of the value of residential house property mortgaged. Also, the bank/housing finance company would undertake a revaluation of the property once every 5 years. The borrower can use the loan amount for renovation and extension of residential property, family’s medical and emergency expenditure etc., amongst others. However, he cannot use the amount for speculative or trading purposes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.386 INCOME TAX LAW

The Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008, now includes within its scope, disbursement of loan by an approved lending institution, in part or in full, to the annuity sourcing institution, for the purposes of periodic payments by way of annuity to the reverse mortgagor. This would be an additional mode of disbursement i.e., in addition to direct disbursements by the approved lending institution to the Reverse Mortgagor by way of periodic payments or lump sum payment in one or more tranches.

An annuity sourcing institution has been defined to mean Life Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer registered with the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.

# Maximum Period of Reverse Mortgage Loan:

|Mode of disbursement|Maximum period of loan|
|---|---|
|(a) Where the loan is disbursed directly to the Reverse Mortgagor|20 years from the date of signing the agreement by the reverse mortgagor and the approved lending institution.|
|(b) Where the loan is disbursed, in part or in full, to the annuity sourcing institution for the purposes of periodic payments by way of annuity to the Reverse mortgagor|The residual life time of the borrower.|

The bank will recover the loan along with the accumulated interest by selling the house after the death of the borrower. The excess amount will be given to the legal heirs. However, before resorting to sale of the house, preference will be given to the legal heirs to repay the loan and interest and get the mortgaged property released.

Therefore, section 47(xvi) clarifies that any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government would not amount to transfer for the purpose of capital gains.

# Exemption of income received in a transaction of reverse mortgage

[Section 10(43)]: Section 10(43), further, provides that the amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in installments, in a transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income-tax.
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.387

# ILLUSTRATION 5

In which of the following situations capital gains tax liability does not arise?

1. Mr. A purchased gold in 1970 for ` 25,000. In the P.Y. 2024-25, he gifted it to his son at the time of marriage. Fair market value (FMV) of the gold on the day the gift was made was ` 1,00,000.
2. A house property is purchased by a Hindu undivided family in 1945 for ` 20,000. It is given to one of the family members in the P.Y. 2024-25 at the time of partition of the family. FMV on the date of partition was ` 12,00,000.
3. Mr. B purchased 50 convertible debentures for ` 40,000 in 1995 which are converted into 500 shares worth ` 85,000 in November 2024 by the company.

# SOLUTION

We know that capital gains arises only when we transfer a capital asset. The liability of capital gains tax in the situations given above is discussed as follows:

1. As per the provisions of section 47(iii), gift of a capital asset by an individual is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
2. As per the provisions of section 47(i), distribution of a capital asset (being in kind) on the total or partial partition of Hindu undivided family is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
3. As per the provisions of section 47(x), conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture stock or deposit certificates in any form of a company into shares or debentures of that company is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Mr. Abhishek a senior citizen, mortgaged his residential house with a bank, under a notified reverse mortgage scheme. He was getting loan from bank in monthly installments. Mr. Abhishek did not repay the loan on maturity and hence gave possession of the house to the bank, to discharge his loan. How will the treatment of long-term capital gain be on such reverse mortgage transaction?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.388 INCOME TAX LAW

# SOLUTION

Section 47(xvi) provides that any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government shall not be considered as a transfer for the purpose of capital gain. Accordingly, the mortgaging of residential house with bank by Mr. Abhishek will not be regarded as a transfer. Therefore, no capital gain will be charged on such transaction.

Further, section 10(43) provides that the amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in installment, in a transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income-tax. Therefore, the monthly installment amounts received by Mr. Abhishek would not be taxable.

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Examine, with reasons, whether the following statements are True or False.

1. Alienation of a residential house in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government is treated as "transfer" for the purpose of capital gains.
2. Zero coupon bonds of eligible corporation, held for 14 months, will be long-term capital assets.
3. Zero Coupon Bond means a bond on which no payment and benefits are received or receivable before maturity or redemption.

# SOLUTION

1. False: As per section 47(xvi), such alienation in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government is not regarded as "transfer" for the purpose of capital gains.
2. True: Section 2(42A) defines the term 'short-term capital asset'. Under the proviso to section 2(42A), zero coupon bond held for not more than 12 months will be treated as a short-term capital asset. Consequently, such bonds held for more than 12 months will be a long-term capital asset.
3. True: As per section 2(48), ‘Zero Coupon Bond’ means a bond issued by any infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or a public sector company, or Scheduled Bank on or after 1ˢᵗ June 2005, in respect of which no payment and benefit is
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.389 received or receivable before maturity or redemption from such issuing entity and which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.

# 4.9 IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS

# (a) Amalgamation [Section 2(1B)]

“Amalgamation”, in relation to companies, means -

- the merger of one or more companies with another company or
- the merger of two or more companies to form one company (the company or companies which so merge being referred to as the amalgamating company or companies and the company with which they merge or which is formed as a result of the merger, as the amalgamated company) in such a manner that -

1. all the property of the amalgamating company or companies immediately before the amalgamation becomes the property of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
2. all the liabilities of the amalgamating company or companies immediately before the amalgamation become the liabilities of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
3. shareholders holding not less than three-fourth in value of the shares in the amalgamating company or companies (other than shares already held therein immediately before the amalgamation by, or by a nominee for, the amalgamated company or its subsidiary) become shareholders of the amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation, otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the property of one company by another company pursuant to the purchase of such property by the other company or as a result of the distribution of such property to the other company after the winding up of the first mentioned company.

# (b) Demerger [Section 2(19AA)]

“Demerger”, in relation to companies, means the transfer, pursuant to a scheme of arrangement under sections 230 to 232 of the Companies Act, 2013, by a demerged company of its one or more undertaking to any resulting company in such a manner that -
# 3.390 INCOME TAX LAW

(i) all the property of the undertaking, being transferred by the demerged company, immediately before the demerger, becomes the property of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;

(ii) all the liabilities relatable to the undertaking, being transferred by the demerged company, immediately before the demerger, become the liabilities of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;

(iii) the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings being transferred by the demerged company are transferred at values appearing in its books of account immediately before the demerger; However, this provision does not apply where, in compliance to the Indian Accounting Standards specified in Annexure to the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015, the resulting company records the value of the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings at a value different from the value appearing in the books of account of the demerged company, immediately before the demerger. For the purpose of determining the value of the property, any change in the value of assets consequent to their revaluation shall be ignored.

(iv) the resulting company issues, in consideration of the demerger, its shares to the shareholders of the demerged company on a proportionate basis; Note - If the resulting company is a shareholder of the demerged company, it cannot issue shares to itself. However, the resulting company has to issue shares to the other shareholders of the demerged company.

(v) the shareholders holding not less than three-fourths in value of the shares in the demerged company (other than shares already held therein immediately before the demerger, or by a nominee for, the resulting company or, its subsidiary) become shareholders of the resulting company or companies by virtue of the demerger, otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the property or assets of the demerged company or any undertaking thereof by the resulting company;

(vi) the transfer of the undertaking is on a going concern basis;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.391

(vii) the demerger is in accordance with the conditions, if any, notified8 by the Central Government in this behalf.

Reconstruction or splitting up of a public sector company into separate companies shall be deemed to be a demerger, if such reconstruction or splitting up has been made to transfer any asset of the demerged company to the resulting company and the resulting company –

- (a) is a public sector company on the appointed day indicated in such scheme as may be approved by the Central Government or any other body authorized under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force governing such public sector companies; and
- (b) fulfils such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government [Explanation 6].

(c) Demerged Company - Demerged company means the company whose undertaking is transferred, pursuant to a demerger, to a resulting company.

(d) Resulting Company - Resulting company means one or more companies (including a wholly owned subsidiary thereof) to which the undertaking of the demerged company is transferred in a demerger and, the resulting company in consideration of such transfer of undertaking, issues shares to the shareholders of the demerged company and includes any authority or body or local authority or public sector company or a company established, constituted or formed as a result of demerger.

# 4.10 MODE OF COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS [SECTION 48]

(i) Computation of capital gains: The income chargeable under the head ‘Capital gains’ shall be computed by deducting the following items from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset:

1. Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer like brokerage, stamp duty, registration fee, legal expenses etc.

8 under sub-section (5) of section 72A

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.392 INCOME TAX LAW

(2) The cost of acquisition and cost of any improvement thereto. However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed on interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A.

Interest on loan taken for acquisition, construction, repairs, reconstruction of house property is allowable as deduction under section 24(b). Sections 80EE and 80EEA in Chapter VI-A provide for deduction of interest payable on loan taken for acquisition of house property, subject to fulfillment of certain conditions.

The interest allowed as deduction under section 24(b) while computing income from house property and interest allowed as deduction under section 80EE or 80EEA of Chapter VI-A would not be included in the cost of acquisition or cost of improvement while computing capital gains on transfer of house property.

(ii) No deduction in respect of STT: No deduction shall, however, be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in respect of any amount paid on account of securities transaction tax (STT) under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.

(iii) Cost inflation index: Under section 48, for computation of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer which takes place before 23.7.2024, the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement will be increased by applying the cost inflation index (CII). Once the cost inflation index is applied to the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement, it becomes indexed cost of acquisition and indexed cost of improvement.

“Cost Inflation Index” in relation to a previous year means such index as may be notified by the Central Government having regard to 75% of average rise in the Consumer Price Index (Urban) for the immediately preceding previous year to such previous year.

Indexed cost of acquisition means an amount which bears to the cost of acquisition, the same proportion as CII for the year in which the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or for the year beginning on 1ˢᵗ April, 2001, whichever is later.

Similarly, indexed cost of any improvement means an amount which bears to the cost of improvement, the same proportion as CII for the year in which the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the first year in which the improvement was made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the year in which the improvement to the asset took place.

Below is the summary showing the indexation benefit available to different types of long-term capital assets which are transferred before 23.7.2024 -

|Long-term capital assets which are transferred before 23.7.2024|Indexation benefit|
|---|---|
|Bonds or debentures|No|
|Capital indexed bonds issued by the Government|Yes|
|Sovereign Gold Bond issued by the RBI under the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme, 2015|Yes|
|Depreciable assets|N.A. since it will be short term capital gain|
|Unit of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023|be short term capital gain|
|Marked linked debentures| |
|Equity share in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of acquisition and transfer|No|
|Unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer|No|
|Other long-term capital assets|Yes|

Consequent to the amendment made by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024 in section 48, no indexation benefit is allowable on long-term capital gains arising on transfer of any capital assets taking place on or after 23.7.2024.

# Computation of tax on LTCG on transfer of land or building or both on or after 23.7.2024 [Section 112]

A resident individual or HUF, while computing tax on LTCG on transfer of land or building or both, has the option to take the benefit of indexation under section 112 in respect of long-term capital gains arising on transfer of land or building or both which is acquired before 23.7.2024 and transferred on or after 23.7.2024. Accordingly, LTCG on transfer of such land or building or both are subject to lower of tax @12.5% (on LTCG computed without indexation benefit) or @20% (on LTCG computed with indexation benefit).

It may be noted that this benefit to a resident individual or HUF is to be given only while computing tax on LTCG under section 112 on transfer of land or building.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.394 INCOME TAX LAW

building or both and not while computing Income under the head “Capital Gains” which would form part of gross total income/total income. Thus, for computing income under the head “Capital Gains” to be included in gross total income, indexation benefit is not to be given even in case of resident individual/HUF transferring land or building or both on or after 23.7.2024 which was acquired before 23.7.2024.

The cost inflation indices for the financial years so far have been notified as under:

|Financial Year|Cost Inflation Index|
|---|---|
|2001-02|100|
|2002-03|105|
|2003-04|109|
|2004-05|113|
|2005-06|117|
|2006-07|122|
|2007-08|129|
|2008-09|137|
|2009-10|148|
|2010-11|167|
|2011-12|184|
|2012-13|200|
|2013-14|220|
|2014-15|240|
|2015-16|254|
|2016-17|264|
|2017-18|272|
|2018-19|280|
|2019-20|289|
|2020-21|301|
|2021-22|317|
|2022-23|331|
|2023-24|348|
|2024-25|363|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.395

# (iv)

Full value of consideration of shares, debentures or warrants issued under ESOP in case of transfer under a gift etc. upto A.Y. 2024-25 - In case where shares, debentures or warrants allotted by a company directly or indirectly to its employees under the Employees' Stock Option Plan or Scheme in accordance with the guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central Government are transferred under a gift or irrecoverable trust upto A.Y. 2024-25, then the market value on the date of such transfer shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer of such asset.

# (v)

Special provision for non-residents – In case of non-residents who invest foreign exchange to acquire capital assets, capital gains arising from the transfer of shares or debentures of an Indian company is to be computed in the following manner:

- The cost of acquisition, the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with the transfer and the full value of the consideration are to be converted into the same foreign currency with which such shares were acquired. The conversion has to be done at the average of Telegraphic Transfer Buying Rate (TTBR) and Telegraphic Transfer Selling Rate (TTSR) on the respective dates.
- The resulting capital gains shall be reconverted into Indian currency by applying the TTBR on the date of transfer.

The aforesaid manner of computation of capital gains shall be applied for every purchase and sale of shares or debentures in an Indian company. This will provide relief from risk of foreign currency fluctuation to non-residents. Benefit of indexation will not be available in this case.

On long-term capital gains arising from transfer of unlisted securities or shares of a company in which public are not substantially interested, non-residents and foreign companies are subject to tax at a concessional rate of 10% (without indexation benefit or currency conversion) if such transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 and @12.5% (without indexation benefit or currency conversion) if such transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024 [Section 112].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.396 INCOME TAX LAW

Note – The benefit of currency conversion would not be applicable to the long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of the following assets referred to in section 112A –

- (i) equity share in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of acquisition and transfer
- (ii) unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer.

# 4.11 ASCERTAINMENT OF COST IN SPECIFIED CIRCUMSTANCES [SECTION 49]

A person becomes the owner of a capital asset not only by purchase but also by several other methods. Section 49 gives guidelines as to how to compute the cost under different circumstances.

|Section|Circumstance|Cost of acquisition|
|---|---|---|
|49(1)|Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee:|Cost for which the previous owner of the property acquired it.|
| |(i) on any distribution of assets on the total or partition of a HUF;| |
| |(ii) under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (by any person upto 31.3.2024);| |
| |(iii) by succession, inheritance or devolution;| |
| |(iv) on any distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company;| |
| |(v) under a transfer to revocable or an irrevocable trust;| |
| |(vi) under any transfer of capital asset by a holding company to its wholly owned subsidiary Indian company or by a subsidiary company to its 100% holding Indian company, referred to in section 47(iv) and 47(v), respectively;| |

Notes –

- Cost of improvement – To the cost of acquisition, the cost of improvement to the asset, incurred by the previous owner or the assessee on or after 1.4.2001 must be added.
- Period of holding - It may be noted that section 2(42A) provides that in all such cases, for determining the period for which the capital asset is held by the transferee, the period of holding of the asset by the previous owner shall also be considered.
- Benefit of indexation - The Bombay High Court, in CIT v. Manjula J. Shah 16 Taxman 42, held that the indexed cost of acquisition in case of gifted asset.
# CAPITAL GAINS

(vii) under any transfer referred to in section 47(vi) of a capital asset by amalgamating company to the amalgamated Indian company, in a scheme of amalgamation; has to be computed with reference to the year in which the previous owner first held the asset and not the year in which the assessee became the owner of the asset.

(viii) under any transfer referred to in section 47(vib), of a capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting Indian company, in a scheme of demerger;

(ix) by conversion by an individual of his separate property into a HUF property, by the mode referred to in section 64(2).

# 49(2)

Where shares in an amalgamated company which is an Indian company become the property of the assessee in consideration of the transfer of shares referred to in section 47(vii) held by him in the amalgamating company under a scheme of amalgamation. The cost of acquisition to him of the shares in the amalgamated company shall be taken as the cost of acquisition of the shares in the amalgamating company.

# 49(2A)

Where a person becomes the owner of shares or debentures in a company during the process of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture stock or deposit certificates referred under section 47(x). That part of the cost of debentures, debenture stock, bond or deposit certificate in relation to which such asset (shares or debentures) is acquired by that person.

# 49(2AA)

Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of specified security or sweat equity shares referred to in section 17(2)(vi).

# 49(2AE)

Where equity shares of a company became the property of the preference share in relation to.
# 3.398 INCOME TAX LAW

assessee in consideration of which such equity shares are transfer by way of conversion of acquired by the assessee.

preference shares of the company

[Section 47(xb)]

# 49(2C) In case of demerger

The cost of acquisition of the shares in the resulting company shall be the amount which bears to the cost of acquisition of shares held by the assessee in the demerged company the same proportion as the net book value of the assets transferred in a demerger bears to the net worth of the demerged company immediately before such demerger.

Cost of acquisition of shares in the resulting company = A × B / C

|A|Cost of acquisition of shares held in the demerged company|
|---|---|
|B|Net book value of the assets transferred in a demerger|
|C|Net worth of the demerged company i.e., the aggregate of the paid up share capital and general reserves as appearing in the books of account of the demerged company immediately before the demerger.|

# 49(2D) In case of demerger

The cost of acquisition of the original shares held by the shareholder in the demerged company shall be deemed to have been reduced by the amount as so arrived under the sub-section (2C)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

|49(4)|Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of such property which has been subject to tax under section 56(2)(x).|The value taken into account for the purposes of section 56(2)(x).|
|---|---|---|
|49(9)|Where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a capital asset which was used by the assessee as inventory earlier before its conversion into capital asset.|The fair market value of the inventory as on the date on such conversion determined in the prescribed manner.|
|49(10)|Where a capital asset, being an Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager became the property of the person as consideration for transfer of gold [Section 47(viid)].|The cost of gold in the hands of the person in whose name the Electronic Gold Receipt is issued.|
| |Where gold is released against an Electronic Gold Receipt, which became the property of the person as consideration for transfer of Electronic Gold Receipt [Section 47(viid)].|The cost of the Electronic Gold Receipt in the hands of such person.|

# 4.12 COST OF ACQUISITION [SECTION 55(2)]

Cost of acquisition is the price that the assessee has paid, or the amount that the assessee has incurred, for acquisition of the asset. Expenses incurred for completing the title are a part of the cost of acquisition. For eg: Stamp duty.

Cost of acquisition in relation to the following assets is as follows:

1. Goodwill of a business or profession or a trademark or brand name associated with a business or profession or any other intangible asset or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage carriage permits and loom hours, or any other right.
2. In case of acquisition from previous owner: In the case of the above capital assets, if the assessee has purchased them from a previous owner, the cost of acquisition means the amount of the purchase price.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.400 INCOME TAX LAW

Example:

If A purchases a stage carriage permit from B for ` 2 lakhs, ` 2 lakhs will be the cost of acquisition for A.

However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price as reduced by the total amount of depreciation (upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).

(ii) In case of circumstances mentioned under section 49(1)(i)/(ii)/(iii)/(iv):

In cases where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of the following modes from the previous owner, and such capital assets were acquired by the previous owner by purchase, cost of acquisition to the assessee will be the amount of the purchase price for such previous owner:

1. On any distribution of assets on the total or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family.
2. Under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (Upto A.Y. 2024-25, gift or will by any person).
3. By succession, inheritance or devolution.
4. On any distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company.
5. Under a transfer to a revocable or an irrevocable trust.
6. Under any transfer of a capital asset referred to in –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

(7) Where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, by the mode referred to in section 64(2) i.e., conversion of self-acquired property of a member of a HUF into the property of the HUF (For details, read Chapter 4).

However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price for such previous owner as reduced by the total amount of depreciation (upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).

(iii) In any other case [i.e., in case of self-generated assets]: In case of self-generated assets, namely, goodwill of a business or profession or any other intangible asset or a trademark or brand name associated with a business or profession or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage carriage permits, or loom hours, or any other right, the cost of acquisition will be taken to be nil.

# Financial assets

Many a time, persons who own shares or other securities become entitled to subscribe to any additional shares or securities. Further, they are also allotted additional shares or securities without any payment. Such shares or securities are referred to as financial assets in Income-tax Act. Section 55 provides the basis for ascertaining the cost of acquisition of such financial assets.

(i) Original shares (which form the basis of entitlement of rights shares): In relation to the original financial asset on the basis of which the assessee becomes entitled to any additional financial assets, cost of acquisition means the amount actually paid for acquiring the original financial assets.

(ii) Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a person): In relation to any right to renounce the said entitlement to subscribe to the financial asset, when such a right is renounced by the assessee in favour of any person, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil in the case of such assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.402 INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Rights shares acquired by the assessee: In relation to the financial asset, to which the assessee has subscribed on the basis of the said entitlement, cost of acquisition means the amount actually paid by him for acquiring such asset.

(iv) Bonus Shares: In relation to the financial asset allotted to the assessee without any payment and on the basis of holding of any other financial assets, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil in the case of such assessee.

In other words, where bonus shares are allotted without any payment on the basis of holding of original shares, the cost of such bonus shares will be nil in the hands of the original shareholder.

Bonus shares allotted before 01.04.2001 - In respect of bonus shares allotted before 1.4.2001, although the cost of acquisition of the shares is nil, the assessee may opt for the fair market value as on 1.4.2001 as the cost of acquisition of such bonus shares.

Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer – In case of transfer of bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018 on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer, the cost would be the higher of –

1. Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of business shares allotted before 1.4.2001)
2. Lower of –

(v) Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the assessee has renounced the rights entitlement: In the case of any financial asset purchased by the person in whose favour the right to subscribe to such assets has been renounced, cost of acquisition means the aggregate of the amount of the purchase price paid by him to the person renouncing such right and the amount paid by him to the company or institution for acquiring such financial asset.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.403

# (3) Long-term capital assets referred to in section 112A

The cost of acquisition in relation to the long-term capital assets being,

- equity shares in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of purchase and transfer or
- unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at the time of transfer.

acquired before 1ˢᵗ February, 2018 shall be the higher of

1. cost of acquisition of such asset; and
2. lower of

- (a) the fair market value of such asset; and
- (b) the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.

# Meaning of Fair Market value

|S.|Circumstance|Fair Market Value|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|In a case where the capital asset is listed on any recognized stock exchange as on 31.01.2018|If there is trading in such asset on such exchange on 31.01.2018 The highest price of the capital asset quoted on such exchange on the said date If there is no trading in such asset on such exchange on 31.01.2018 The highest price of such asset on such exchange on a date immediately preceding 31.01.2018 when such asset was traded on such exchange.|
|(ii)|In a case where the capital asset is a unit which is not listed on any recognized stock exchange as on 31.01.2018|The net asset value of such unit as on the said date|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.404 INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) In a case where the capital asset is an equity share in a company which is

- not listed on a recognized stock exchange as on 31.01.2018 but listed on such exchange on the date of transfer
- not listed on a recognized stock exchange as on 31.01.2018 or which became the property of the assessee in consideration of shares which is not listed on such exchange as on 31.01.2018 by way of transaction covered under section 47 but listed on such exchange subsequent to the date of transfer (where transfer is in respect of sale of unlisted equity shares under an offer for sale to the public included in an initial public offer)
- listed on a recognized stock exchange on the date of transfer and which became the property of the assessee in consideration of share which is not listed on such exchange as on 31.01.2018 by way of transaction not regarded as transfer under section 47

An amount which bears to the cost of acquisition the same proportion as CII for the financial year 2017-18 bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or on 01.04.2001, whichever is later.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.405

# (4) Any other capital asset

(i) Where the capital asset become the property of the assessee before 1-4-2001, cost of acquisition means the cost of acquisition of the asset to the assessee or the fair market value of the asset on 1-4-2001, at the option of the assessee.

Example: A house property was purchased by Mr. A on 1.1.1992 for ` 30,000 and the fair market value of the same was ` 1,40,000 as on 1.4.2001. Cost of acquisition of the said property would be ` 1,40,000.

However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.

Example: In the above example, if the stamp duty value of the property was ` 1,20,000 as on 1.4.2001, cost of acquisition of such property would be ` 1,20,000, being the stamp value as on 1.4.2001 and not ` 1,40,000.

(ii) Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of the modes specified in section 49(1): The cost of acquisition to the assessee will be the cost of acquisition to the previous owner. Even in such cases, where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1-4-2001, the assessee can opt the fair market value as on 1-4-2001 as the cost of acquisition.

However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.

Note: The provisions contained in (i) & (ii) of (4) above shall also apply to the financial assets mentioned in (i) to (v) of (2) and long term capital assets referred to in section 112A of (3) above.

(iii) Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee on the distribution of the capital assets of a company on its liquidation and the assessee has been assessed to capital gains in respect of that asset under section 46, the cost of acquisition means the fair market value of the asset on the date of distribution.

(iv) A share or a stock of a company may become the property of an assessee under the following circumstances:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.406 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) the consolidation and division of all or any of the share capital of the company into shares of larger amount than its existing shares.

(b) the conversion of any shares of the company into stock,

(c) the re-conversion of any stock of the company into shares,

(d) the sub-division of any of the shares of the company into shares of smaller amount, or

(e) the conversion of one kind of shares of the company into another kind.

In the above circumstances the cost of acquisition to the assessee will mean the cost of acquisition of the asset calculated with reference to the cost of acquisition of the shares or stock from which such asset is derived.

(5) Where the cost for which the previous owner acquired the property cannot be ascertained, the cost of acquisition to the previous owner means the fair market value on the date on which the capital asset became the property of the previous owner.

# Cost of Acquisition of certain assets: At a Glance

|Sl. No.|Nature of asset|Cost of acquisition|
|---|---|---|
|1|Goodwill of business or profession, trademark, brand name or any other intangible asset etc.,| |
| |- Self generated|Nil|
| |- Acquired from previous owner|Purchase price|
| |However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)|Purchase price as reduced by the total amount of depreciation obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).|
| |- became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (by any person upto 31.3.2024), by succession, inheritance, distribution of assets|Purchase price for such previous owner|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

on liquidation of a company, etc. and previous owner has acquired it by purchase

However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession which was acquired by the previous owner by purchase and in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)

# 1. Bonus Shares:

|Allotted before 1.4.2001|FMV as on 1.4.2001|
|---|---|
|Allotted on or after 1.4.2001|Nil|
|Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer|The higher of –|
|(i) Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of bonus shares allotted before 1.4.2001)| |
|(ii) Lower of –| |
|(a) FMV as on 31.1.2018; and| |
|(b) Actual sale consideration| |

# 2. Rights Shares:

|Original shares (which form the basis of entitlement of rights shares)|Amount actually paid for acquiring the original shares|
|---|---|
|Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a person)|Nil|
|Rights shares acquired by the assessee|Amount actually paid for acquiring the rights shares|
|Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the assessee has renounced the rights entitlement|Purchase price paid to the renouncer of rights entitlement as well as the amount paid to the company which has allotted the rights shares.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.408 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4 Long term capital assets being,

Cost of acquisition shall be the higher of

- (i) actual cost of acquisition of such asset; and
- (ii) lower of

- - the fair market value of such asset; and
- - the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset.

# 5 Any other capital asset

Where such capital asset became the property of the assessee before 1.4.2001

Cost of the asset to the assessee, or FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option of the assessee.

However, in case of capital asset being land or building, FMV as on 1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp duty value as on 1.4.2001.

Where capital assets became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (by any person upto 31.3.2024), by succession, inheritance, distribution of assets on liquidation of a company, etc. and the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1.4.2001.

The provisions contained in (5) above shall also apply to the assets mentioned in (3) and (4) above.

# 6 Where cost of the property in the hands of previous owner cannot be ascertained

The FMV on the date on which the capital asset become the property of the previous owner would be considered as cost of acquisition.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

ILLUSTRATION 8

Mr. A converts his capital asset acquired for an amount of ` 50,000 in June, 2004 into stock-in-trade in the month of November, 2023. The fair market value of the asset on the date of conversion is ` 4,50,000. The stock-in-trade was sold for an amount of ` 6,50,000 in the month of September, 2024. What will be the tax treatment?

|Financial year|Cost Inflation Index|
|---|---|
|2004-05|113|
|2023-24|348|
|2024-25|363|

# SOLUTION

The capital gains on the sale of the capital asset converted to stock-in-trade is taxable in the given case. It arises in the year of conversion (i.e. P.Y. 2023-24) but will be taxable only in the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold (i.e. P.Y. 2024-25). Profits from business will also be taxable in the year of sale of the stock-in-trade (P.Y. 2024-25).

# The LTCG and business income for the A.Y.2025-26 are calculated as under:

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Profits and Gains from Business or Profession|Sale proceeds of the stock-in-trade|6,50,000|
|Less: Cost of the stock-in-trade (FMV on the date of conversion)|4,50,000|2,00,000|
|Long Term Capital Gains|Full value of the consideration (FMV on the date of the conversion)|4,50,000|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (` 50,000 x 348/113)|1,53,982|2,96,018|

Note: For the purpose of indexation, the cost inflation index of the year in which the asset is converted into stock-in-trade should be considered. Since the transfer (conversion into stock-in-trade) took place in the P.Y. 2023-24, the benefit of indexation would be available. The date of sale of stock-in-trade is not relevant for determining whether benefit of indexation would be available.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.410 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.13 COST OF IMPROVEMENT [SECTION 55(1)]

(1) Goodwill or any other intangible asset of a business, etc. [Section 55(1)(b)(1)]: In relation to a capital asset being goodwill or any other intangible asset of a business or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession or any other right, the cost of improvement shall be taken to be Nil.

(2) Any other capital asset [Section 55(1)(b)(2)]:

|Circumstance|Cost of improvement|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner or the assessee before 1.4.2001| |
|(a) In a case covered u/s 49(1), where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner and the assessee before 1.4.2001|All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the assessee.|
|(b) In a case covered u/s 49(1), where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1.4.2001 but became the property of the assessee on or after 1.4.2001|All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the previous owner and the assessee.|
|(c) In a case not covered u/s 49(1)|All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 by the assessee.|
|(ii) Where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner and the assessee on or after 1.4.2001| |
|(a) In a case covered u/s 49(1)|All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset by the previous owner and the assessee.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

(b) In a case not covered u/s 49(1) All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset by the assessee after it became the assessee’s property.

In a nutshell, in a case covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to the capital asset by the previous owner or the assessee or both on or after 1.4.2001. In a case not covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to the capital asset by the assessee on or after 1.4.2001.

However, cost of improvement does not include any expenditure which is deductible in computing the income chargeable under the head “Income from house property”, “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”. Routine expenses on repairs and maintenance do not form part of cost of improvement.

# 4.14 COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS [SECTIONS 50 & 50A]

(1) Transfer of depreciable assets [Section 50]: Section 50 provides for the computation of capital gains in case of depreciable assets. It may be noted that where the capital asset is a depreciable asset forming part of a block of assets, section 50 will have over-riding effect in spite of anything contained in section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset.

Accordingly, where the capital asset is an asset forming part of a block of assets in respect of which depreciation has been allowed, the provisions of sections 48 and 49 shall be subject to the following modification:

- Where the full value of consideration received or accruing for the transfer of the asset plus the full value of such consideration for the transfer of any other capital asset falling with the block of assets during previous year exceeds the aggregate of the following amounts namely:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.412 INCOME TAX LAW

(1) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer;

(2) WDV of the block of assets at the beginning of the previous year;

(3) the actual cost of any asset falling within the block of assets acquired during the previous year such excess shall be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of short-term capital assets.

• Where all assets in a block are transferred during the previous year, the block itself will cease to exist. In such a situation, the difference between the sale value of the assets and the WDV of the block of assets at the beginning of the previous year together with the actual cost of any asset falling within that block of assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year will be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of short-term capital assets.

# Transfer of depreciable assets: Tax consequences

|No|Yes|
|---|---|
|Is V > C ?|Does the block cease to exist?|
|Yes|No|
|V (-) C is STCG|C (-) V is the Closing WDV of the block|

# Symbol Description

|Symbol|Description|
|---|---|
|V|Full value of consideration|
|C|Opening WDV of Block (+) Actual Cost of Asset acquired in the Block during the P.Y. (+) Expenses in connection with transfer of asset|
|STCG|Short Term Capital Gain|
|STCL|Short Term Capital Loss|
|WDV|Written Down Value|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.413

# (2) Cost of acquisition in case of power sector assets [Section 50A]:

With respect to the power sector, in case of depreciable assets referred to in section 32(1)(i), the provisions of sections 48 and 49 shall apply subject to the modification that the WDV of the asset [as defined in section 43(6)], as adjusted, shall be taken to be the cost of acquisition.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Singhania & Co., a sole proprietorship owns six machines, put in use for business in March, 2023. The depreciation on these machines is charged @15%. The opening balance of these machines after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 was ` 8,50,000. Three of the old machines were sold on 10th June, 2024 for ` 11,00,000. A second hand plant was bought for ` 8,50,000 on 30th November, 2024.

You are required to:

1. determine the claim of depreciation for Assessment Year 2025-26.
2. compute the capital gains liable to tax for Assessment Year 2025-26.
3. If Singhania & Co. had sold the three machines in June, 2024 for ` 21,00,000, will there be any difference in your above workings? Explain.

# SOLUTION

# (i) Computation of depreciation for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Opening balance of the block as on 1.4.2024 [i.e., W.D.V. as on 31.3.2024 after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24]|8,50,000|
|Add: Purchase of second-hand plant during the year|8,50,000|
| |17,00,000|
|Less: Sale consideration of old machinery during the year|11,00,000|
|W.D.V of the block as on 31.03.2025|6,00,000|

Since the value of the block as on 31.3.2025 comprises of a new asset which has been put to use for less than 180 days, depreciation is restricted to 50% of the prescribed percentage of 15% i.e. depreciation is restricted to 7½%. Therefore, the depreciation allowable for the year is ` 45,000, being 7½% of ` 6,00,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.414 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) The provisions under section 50 for computation of capital gains in the case of depreciable assets can be invoked only under the following circumstances:

- (a) When one or some of the assets in the block are sold for consideration more than the value of the block.
- (b) When all the assets are transferred for a consideration more than the value of the block.
- (c) When all the assets are transferred for a consideration less than the value of the block.

Since in the first two cases, the sale consideration is more than the written down value of the block, the computation would result in short term capital gains. In the third case, since the written down value of the block exceeds the sale consideration, the resultant figure would be a short-term capital loss of the block. In the given case, capital gains will not arise as the block of asset continues to exist, and some of the assets are sold for a price which is lesser than the written down value of the block.

(iii) If the three machines are sold in June, 2024 for ` 21,00,000, then short term capital gains would arise, since the sale consideration is more than the aggregate of the written down value of the block at the beginning of the year and the additions made during the year.

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Sale consideration| |21,00,000|
|Less: Opening balance of the block as on 1.4.2024| |8,50,000|
|[i.e., W.D.V. as on 31.3.2024 after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24]| | |
|Purchase of second plant during the year|8,50,000|17,00,000|
|Short term capital gains| |4,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN CASE OF MARKET LINKED DEBENTURES [SECTIONS 50AA]

(1) Transfer of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund or Market Linked Debenture or unlisted bond or unlisted debenture: Section 50AA provides for the computation of capital gains in case of transfer or redemption or maturity of

- unit(s) of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or
- a Market Linked Debenture or
- an unlisted bond or unlisted debentures which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024.

Section 50AA will have an overriding effect in spite of anything contained in section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset and section 48 providing the manner of computation of capital gains.

Accordingly, capital gain arising from the transfer or redemption or maturity of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or Market Linked Debenture or an unlisted bond or unlisted debentures which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024 would be deemed to be short term capital gains and chargeable to tax at normal rate of tax.

(2) Computation of capital gains: The full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer or redemption or maturity of such debenture or unit or bond as reduced by the cost of acquisition of the debenture or unit and the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer or redemption or maturity would be deemed to be the capital gains.

(3) No deduction in respect of STT: No deduction would be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in respect of any sum paid on account of securities transaction tax (STT) under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.416 INCOME TAX LAW

# (4) Meaning of certain terms:

|S. No.|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Market Linked Debenture|(i) which has an underlying principal component in the form of debt security; and (ii) where the returns are linked to market returns on other underlying securities or indices. It includes any security classified or regulated as a market linked debenture by the SEBI.|
|(ii)|Specified Mutual Fund|A Mutual Fund where not more than 35% of its total proceeds is invested in the equity shares of domestic companies. However, the percentage of equity shareholding held in respect of the Specified Mutual Fund shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the daily closing figures.|

# 4.16 CAPITAL GAINS IN RESPECT OF SLUMP SALE [SECTION 50B]

# (1) Meaning of slump sale [Section 2(42C)]

– Slump sale means transfer of one or more undertakings, by any means, for a lump sum consideration without values being assigned to the individual assets and liabilities in such transfer.

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Undertaking|It includes any part of an undertaking, or a unit or division of an undertaking or a business activity taken as a whole, but does not include individual assets or liabilities or any combination thereof not constituting a business activity.|
|Transfer|Meaning assigned to it in section 2(47) [It would include sale, exchange, relinquishment of capital asset, extinguishment of any rights therein, compulsory acquisition under any law etc. – See detailed definition in page 3.374]|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.417

Note - The determination of the value of an asset or liability for the sole purpose of payment of stamp duty, registration fees or other similar taxes or fees shall not be regarded as assignment of values to individual assets or liabilities.

# (2) Capital gains – Whether long-term or short-term? [Section 50B(1)]

Any profits or gains arising from the slump sale of one or more undertakings held for more than 36 months, shall be chargeable to income-tax as capital gains arising from the transfer of long-term capital assets and shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place.

Any profits and gains arising from such transfer of one or more undertakings held by the assessee for not more than 36 months shall be deemed to be short-term capital gains.

# (3) Deemed cost of acquisition and cost of improvement [Section 50B(2)(i)]

The net worth of the undertaking or the division, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition and the cost of improvement for the purposes of sections 48 and 49 in relation to capital assets of such undertaking or division transferred. No indexation benefit would be available even if it results in a long-term capital gain, irrespective of the date of transfer of the undertaking i.e., whether before or on or after 23.7.2024.

# (4) Deemed full value of consideration [Section 50B(2)(ii)]

Fair market value of the capital assets as on the date of transfer, calculated in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital asset.

Accordingly, the CBDT has prescribed that, for the purpose of section 50B(2)(ii), the fair market value (FMV) of capital assets would be the higher of –

- (i) FMV 1, being the fair market value of capital assets transferred by way of slump sale (determined on the date of slump sale); and
- (ii) FMV 2, being the fair market value of the consideration (monetary and non-monetary) received or accruing as a result of transfer by way of slump sale

# (5) Report of a Chartered Accountant [Section 50B(3)]

Every assessee, in the case of slump sale, shall furnish in the prescribed form on or before 30ᵗʰ

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.418 INCOME TAX LAW

September of the A.Y. [i.e., the specified date referred under section 44AB, being the date one month prior to the due date for filing return of income under section 139(1)], a report of a chartered accountant indicating the computation of net worth of the undertaking or division, as the case may be, and certifying that the net worth of the undertaking or division has been correctly arrived at in accordance with the provisions of this section.

# (6) Meaning of Certain Terms:

|Explanation|Term|Particulars|
|---|---|---|
|1|Net worth|Aggregate value of total assets of the undertaking or division as reduced by the value of liabilities of such undertaking or division as appearing in the books of account. However, any change in the value of assets on account of revaluation of assets shall not be considered for this purpose|
|2|Aggregate value of total assets|In the case of depreciable assets: The written down value of block of assets determined in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-item (C) of item (i) of section 43(6)(c); In case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, which has not been acquired by the assessee by purchase from a previous owner [Self-generated goodwill]: Nil Capital asset in respect of which 100% deduction is claimed: In case of capital assets in respect of which the whole of the expenditure has been allowed or is allowable as a deduction under section 35AD: Nil; For all other assets: Book value|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# 3.419

# Capital Gains on Slump Sale of an Undertaking [Section 50B]

Is the undertaking held for more than 36 months before transfer?

|Yes|No|
|---|---|
|Resultant capital gain is LTCG|Resultant capital gain is STCG|

(No indexation benefit would be available)

LTCG is taxable @ 20% if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024

LTCG is taxable @ 12.5% if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024

# Computation of capital gains on slump sale

|Full value of Consideration = Fair market value of the capital asset on the date of transfer (Higher of FMV1 and FMV2)| | |
|---|---|---|
|(-)|Deemed cost of acquisition/cost of Improvement| |
| |Net Worth| |
|Aggregate value of total assets of the undertaking*|(-)|Value of liabilities of the undertaking appearing in the books of account|

In case of depreciable assets

|Self-generated goodwill of a business or profession|In case of capital assets where the whole exp. has been allowed u/s 35AD|In case of other assets| |
|---|---|---|---|
|WDV as per section 43(6)(c)|(+)|Nil| |
|(+)|Nil|(+)|Book value|

* Ignore revaluation effect

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.420 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. A is a proprietor of Akash Enterprises, having 2 units. He transferred on 1.4.2024 his Unit 1 by way of slump sale for a total consideration of ` 25 lakhs. The fair market value of capital assets of unit 1 on 1.4.2024 is ` 30 lakhs. Unit 1 was started in the year 2005-06. The expenses incurred for this transfer were ` 28,000.

His Balance Sheet as on 31.3.2024 is as under:

|Liabilities|Total (`)|Assets|Unit 1(`)|Unit 2|Total (`)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Own Capital|15,00,000|Land|12,00,000|2,00,000|14,00,000|
|Revaluation Reserve|3,00,000|Machinery|3,00,000|1,00,000|4,00,000|
|(for land of unit 1)| |Debtors|1,00,000|40,000|1,40,000|
|Bank loan (70% for unit 1)|2,00,000|Other assets|1,50,000|60,000|2,10,000|
|Trade creditors (25% for unit 1)|1,50,000| | | | |
|Total|21,50,000|Total|17,50,000|4,00,000|21,50,000|

Other information:

1. Revaluation reserve is created by revising upward the value of the land of Unit 1.
2. No individual value of any asset is considered in the transfer deed.
3. Other assets of Unit 1 include patents acquired on 1.7.2022 for ` 50,000 on which no depreciation has been charged.
4. The value of machinery represents the written down value as per the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Compute the capital gain for the assessment year 2025-26.

# SOLUTION

Computation of capital gains on slump sale of Unit 1

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Full value of consideration [Higher of FMV of capital assets of Unit 1 on 1.4.2024 or FMV of monetary consideration received]|30,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.421

Less: Expenses for transfer

28,000

29,72,000

Less: Net worth (See Note 1 below)

12,50,625

# Long-term capital gain

17,21,375

# Notes:

1. Computation of net worth of Unit 1 of Akash Enterprises
|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Land (excluding ` 3 lakhs on account of revaluation)|9,00,000|
|Machinery|3,00,000|
|Debtors|1,00,000|
|Patents (See Note 2 below)|28,125|
|Other assets (` 1,50,000 – ` 50,000)|1,00,000|
|Total assets|14,28,125|
|Less: Creditors (25% of ` 1,50,000)|37,500|
|Bank Loan (70% of ` 2,00,000)|1,40,000|
| |1,77,500|
|Net worth|12,50,625|
2. Written down value of patents as on 1.4.2024
|Value of patents:|`|
|---|---|
|Cost as on 1.7.2022|50,000|
|Less: Depreciation @ 25% for Financial Year 2022-23|12,500|
|Balance as on 1.4.2023|37,500|
|Less: Depreciation for Financial Year 2023-24|9,375|
|Balance as on 1.4.2024|28,125|
3. Since the Unit is held for more than 36 months, capital gain arising would be long term capital gain. However, indexation benefit is not available in case of slump sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.422 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.17 DEEMED FULL VALUE OF CONSIDERATION FOR COMPUTING CAPITAL GAINS

# [SECTIONS 50C, 50CA & 50D]

|S.|Capital Asset|Section|Circumstance|Deemed Full Value of consideration for computing Capital Gains|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Land or Building or both|50C|(1) If Stamp Duty Value >110% of Stamp Duty Value consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer| |
| | | |(a) If date of agreement is different from the date of transfer and whole or part of the consideration is received by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or ECS or through such other prescribed electronic modes (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, Net banking, debit card, credit card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on or before the date of agreement|Stamp Duty Value on the date of agreement|
| | | |(b) If date of agreement is different from the date of transfer but the whole or part of the consideration has not been received by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or ECS or through such other prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement.|Stamp Duty Value on the date of transfer|
| | | |However, if the stamp duty value on the date of agreement or the date of transfer, as the case may be ≤ 110% of the sale consideration received|Consideration so received|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.423

# Example

Let us take a case where for transfer of building –

- the actual consideration is ` 100 lakh;
- the stamp duty value on the date of agreement is ` 109 lakh; and
- the stamp duty value on the date of transfer is ` 112 lakh

# (i) If any part of the consideration is paid by prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement

The actual consideration of ` 100 lakh would be the full value of consideration, since stamp duty value of ` 109 lakhs on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of actual consideration of ` 100 lakhs.

# (ii) If no part of the consideration is paid by prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement

Stamp duty value of ` 112 lakhs on the date of transfer would be the full value of consideration, since the same exceeds 110% of actual consideration of ` 100 lakhs.

# (2) Where the Assessing Officer refers the valuation to a Valuation Officer, on the assessee’s claim that the stamp duty value exceeds the FMV of the property on the date of transfer and the stamp duty value has not been disputed in any appeal or revision or no reference has been made before any other authority, court or High Court

|(a) If Valuation by Valuation Officer| | |Stamp Duty Value|
|---|---|---|---|
|(b) If Valuation by Valuation Officer|Valuation by| |Stamp Duty Value|
| | |Valuation Officer| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.424 INCOME TAX LAW

155(15)
(3)
If stamp duty value has been adopted
Value so revised
as full value of consideration, and in such appeal or
subsequently the value is revised in
revision
1. Unquoted shares 50CA
If consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer < FMV of such share determined in the prescribed manner. The provisions of this section would not, however, be applicable to any consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer by such class of persons and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
2. Any Capital asset 50D
Where the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of a capital asset by an assessee is not ascertainable or cannot be determined.

# Meaning of certain terms:

|S. No.|Term|Section|Meaning|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i)|Stamp Duty Value|50C|The value adopted or assessed or assessable by any authority of a State Government (Stamp Valuation Authority) for the purpose of payment of stamp duty.|
|(ii)|Assessable|50C|The term ‘assessable’ has been defined to mean the price which the stamp valuation authority would have, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, adopted or assessed, if it were referred to such authority for the purposes of the payment of stamp duty. The term “assessable” has been added to cover transfers executed through power of attorney.|
|(iii)|Quoted Shares|50CA|The share quoted on any recognized stock exchange with regularity from time to time, where the quotation of such share is based on current transaction made in the ordinary course of business.|

Note – The valuation rules prescribed in Rule 11UA for valuation of unquoted equity shares would be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.425

# 4.18 ADVANCE MONEY RECEIVED [SECTION 51]

It is possible for an assessee to receive some advance in regard to the transfer of capital asset. Due to the break-down of the negotiation, the assessee may have retained the advance.

Section 51 provides that while calculating capital gains, the above advance retained by the assessee must go to reduce the cost of acquisition. However, if advance has been received and retained by the previous owner and not the assessee himself, then the same will not go to reduce the cost of acquisition of the assessee.

Section 56(2)(ix) provides for the taxability of any sum of money, received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset. Consequently, such sum shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Income from other sources’, if such sum is forfeited on or after 1ˢᵗ April, 2014 and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset.

In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and retained, section 51 provides that where any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset has been included in the total income of the assessee for any previous year in accordance with section 56(2)(ix), then, such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for which the asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair market value, as the case may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.

However, any such sum of money forfeited before 1ˢᵗ April, 2014, will be deducted from the cost of acquisition for computing capital gains.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.426 INCOME TAX LAW

# Tax treatment of advance money forfeited on failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset [Sections 51 & 56(2)(ix)]

|If advance was received and forfeited before 1-4-2014|If advance was received and forfeited on or after 1-4-2014|
|---|---|
|Advance forfeited to be deducted while determining Cost of acquisition for computing capital gains|Advance forfeited to be taxed under 56(2)(ix) as Income from other sources|
|Taxability is postponed to the year of actual transfer of capital asset.|Tax liability is attracted in the year of forfeiture of advance|

# 4.19 EXEMPTION OF CAPITAL GAINS

# Exemption of Capital Gains

# Exemptions under Section 10

Exemption of capital gains on compulsory acquisition of agricultural land situated within specified urban limits [Section 10(37)]

With a view to mitigate the hardship faced by the farmers whose agricultural land situated in specified urban limits has been compulsorily acquired, clause (37) of section 10 exempts the capital gains arising to an individual or a HUF from transfer of agricultural land by way of compulsory acquisition.

Such exemption is available where the compensation or the enhanced compensation or consideration, as the case may be, is received on or after 1.4.2004.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.427

The exemption is available only when such land has been used for agricultural purposes during the preceding two years immediately preceding the date of transfer by such individual or a parent of his or by such HUF.

# II. Exemption of Capital Gains under section 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F

# (i) Capital Gains on sale of residential house [Section 54]

Eligible assessees – Individual & HUF

# Conditions to be fulfilled

- There should be a transfer of residential house (buildings or lands appurtenant thereto)
- It must be a long-term capital asset
- Income from such house should be chargeable under the head “Income from house property”
- Where the amount of capital gains exceeds ` 2 crore
- - Where the amount of capital gain exceeds ` 2 crore, one residential house in India should be –

Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore
- - Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore, the assessee i.e., individual or HUF, may at his option,

Where during any assessment year, the assessee has exercised the option to purchase or construct two residential houses in India, he shall not be subsequently entitled to exercise the option for the same or any other assessment year.
- This implies that if an assessee has availed the option of claiming benefit of section 54 in respect of purchase of two residential houses
# 3.428 INCOME TAX LAW

in Jaipur and Jodhpur, say, in respect of capital gains of ` 1.50 crores arising from transfer of residential house at Bombay in the P.Y. 2024-25, then, he will not be entitled to avail the benefit of section 54 again in respect of purchase of two residential houses in, say, Pune and Baroda, in respect of capital gains of ` 1.20 crores arising from transfer of residential house in Jaipur in the P.Y. 2027-28, even though the capital gains arising on transfer of the residential house at Jaipur does not exceed ` 2 crore.

- If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then, the capital gain has to be deposited under the Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) [Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading]. However, the capital gain in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS.
- Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase or construction of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset. The deemed cost of the new asset would be restricted to ` 10 crores for the purpose of exemption under section 54.

# Quantum of Exemption

- If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be ≥ long term capital gains, entire long term capital gains is exempt.
- If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be < long term capital gains, long term capital gains to the extent of cost of new residential house is exempt.

However, if the cost of new residential house(s) exceeds ` 10 crores, the amount exceeding ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for exemption. It means the maximum exemption that can be claimed by the assessee u/s 54 is ` 10 crore.

# Examples:

1. If the long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and the cost of the new house is ` 3 crore, then, the entire long-term capital gains of ` 2.05 crore is exempt.
2. If long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and cost of new house is ` 1.55 crore, then, long-term capital gains is exempt only up to ` 1.55 crore. Balance ` 50 lakhs is taxable/s 112.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

|S.No.|LTCG computed|Cost of new residential house|Amount in column (3) or ` 10 crore, whichever is lower|Exempt LTCG [Lower of column (2) and column (4)]|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(1)|` 7 crore|` 12 crore|` 10 crore|` 7 crore|
|(2)|` 12 crore|` 14 crore|` 10 crore|` 10 crore|
|(3)|` 11 crore|` 9 crore|` 9 crore|` 9 crore|
|(4)|` 15 crore|` 13 crore|` 10 crore|` 10 crore|

# Examples

1. If the LTCG is ` 8 crore and the assessee has incurred ` 5 crore in construction of new residential house upto the due date u/s 139(1) i.e., 31.7.2025/ 31.10.2025, as the case may be, then, as per section 54(2), he can deposit the amount of ` 3 crore not appropriated by him towards construction of house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, in Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) for claiming exemption under section 54. If he deposits, say, ` 2 crore, in CGAS on or before the due date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house would be ` 7 crore (` 5 crore + ` 2 crore). The amount exempt u/s 54 would be ` 7 crore.

2. If the LTCG is ` 14 crore and the assessee has already incurred ` 7 crore in construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, then, as per section 54(2), he can deposit the difference of ` 3 crore (` 10 crore - ` 7 crore) in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54. If he deposits, say, ` 2 crore in CGAS on or before the due date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house would be ` 9 crore (` 7 crore + ` 2 crore). The amount exempt under section 54 would be ` 9 crore.

# Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years

If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its acquisition or construction, then cost of the asset will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.430 INCOME TAX LAW

Example: The long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and the cost of the new house is ` 3 crore, the entire long-term capital gains of ` 2.05 crore will be exempt. If the new house was sold after 18 months for ` 5 crore, then, short term capital gain chargeable to tax would be –

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Net Consideration|5,00,00,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition minus capital gains exempt earlier (` 3,00,00,000 – ` 2,05,00,000)|95,00,000|
|Short term capital gains chargeable to tax|4,05,00,000|

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. Cee purchased a residential house on July 20, 2022 for ` 10,00,000 and made some additions to the house incurring ` 2,00,000 in August 2022. He sold the house property in April 2024 for ` 20,00,000. Out of the sale proceeds, he spent ` 5,00,000 to purchase another house property in September 2024.

What is the amount of capital gains taxable in the hands of Mr. Cee for the A.Y.2025-26?

# SOLUTION

The house is sold before 24 months from the date of purchase. Hence, the house is a short-term capital asset and no benefit of indexation would be available.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Sale consideration|20,00,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition|10,00,000|
|Cost of improvement|2,00,000|
|Short-term capital gains|8,00,000|

Note - The exemption of capital gains under section 54 is available only in case of long-term capital asset. As the house is short-term capital asset, Mr. Cee cannot claim exemption under section 54. Thus, the amount of taxable short-term capital gains is ` 8,00,000.

# (ii) Capital gains on transfer of agricultural land [Section 54B]

Eligible assessee – Individual & HUF

Conditions to be fulfilled

- There should be a transfer of urban agricultural land.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

• Such land must have been used for agricultural purposes by the assessee, being an individual or his parent, or a HUF in the 2 years immediately preceding the date of transfer.

• He should purchase another agricultural land (urban or rural) within 2 years from the date of transfer.

• If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS (Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading.). Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.

# Quantum of exemption

• If cost of new agricultural land ≥ capital gains, entire capital gains is exempt.

• If cost of new agricultural land < capital gains, capital gains to the extent of cost of new agricultural land is exempt.

# Examples:

1. If the capital gains is ` 3 lakhs and the cost of the new agricultural land is ` 4 lakhs, then, the entire capital gains of ` 3 lakhs is exempt.

2. If capital gains is ` 3 lakhs and cost of new agricultural land is ` 2 lakhs, then, capital gains is exempt only upto ` 2 lakhs.

# Consequences of transfer of new agricultural land before 3 years

• If the new agricultural land is transferred before 3 years from the date of its acquisition, then cost of the land will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains of new agricultural land.

• However, if the new agricultural land is a rural agricultural land, there would be no capital gains on transfer of such land.

• Continuing in the above example 1, if the new agricultural land (urban land) is sold after, say, 1 year for ` 6 lakhs, then short term capital gain chargeable to tax would be –

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Net consideration|6,00,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition minus capital gains exempt earlier|1,00,000|
|(` 4,00,000 – ` 3,00,000)| |
|Short-term capital gains chargeable to tax|5,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.432 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iii) Capital Gains on transfer by way of compulsory acquisition of land and building of an industrial undertaking [Section 54D]

Eligible assessee – Any assessee

# Conditions to be fulfilled

- There must be compulsory acquisition of land and building or any right in land or building forming part of an industrial undertaking.
- The land and building should have been used by the assessee for purposes of the business of the industrial undertaking in the 2 years immediately preceding the date of transfer.
- The assessee must purchase any other land or building or construct any building (for shifting or re-establishing the existing undertaking or setting up a new industrial undertaking) within 3 years from the date of transfer.
- If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS. (Refer point (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading). Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset.

# Quantum of exemption

- If cost of new asset ≥ Capital gains, entire capital gains is exempt.
- If cost of new asset < Capital gains, capital gains to the extent of cost of new asset is exempt.

Note: The exemption in respect of capital gains from transfer of capital asset would be available even in respect of short-term capital asset, being land or building or any right in any land or building, provided such capital asset is used by assessee for the industrial undertaking belonging to him, even if he was not the owner for the said period of 2 years.

# Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years

- If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its acquisition, then cost of the asset will be reduced by capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# (iv) Capital Gains not chargeable on investment in certain bonds [Section 54EC]

Eligible assessee – Any assessee

# Conditions to be fulfilled

- There should be transfer of a long-term capital asset being land or building or both.
- Such asset can also be a depreciable asset (in this case, building) held for more than 24 months9.
- The capital gains arising from such transfer should be invested in a long-term specified asset within 6 months from the date of transfer.
- Long-term specified asset means specified bonds, redeemable after 5 years, issued on or after 1.4.2018 by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) or the Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (RECL) or any other bond notified by the Central Government in this behalf [Bonds of Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and Indian Railways Finance Corporation (IRFC)].
- The assessee should not transfer or convert or avail loan or advance on the security of such bonds for a period of 5 years from the date of acquisition of such bonds.

# Quantum of exemption

- Capital gains or amount invested in specified bonds, whichever is lower.
- The maximum investment which can be made in notified bonds or bonds of NHAI and RECL, out of capital gains arising from transfer of one or more assets, during the previous year in which the original asset is transferred and in the subsequent financial year cannot exceed ` 50 lakhs.

# Violation of condition

- In case of transfer or conversion of such bonds or availing loan or advance on security of such bonds before the expiry of 5 years, the capital gain exempted earlier shall be taxed as long-term capital gain in the year of violation of condition.

9 CIT v. Dempo Company Ltd (2016) 387 ITR 354 (SC)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.434 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 12

Long term capital gain of ` 75 lakhs arising from transfer of building on 1.5.2024 will be exempt from tax if such capital gain is invested in the bonds redeemable after five years, issued by NHAI under section 54EC. Examine with reasons whether the given statement is true or false having regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

# SOLUTION

False: The exemption under section 54EC has been restricted, by limiting the maximum investment in long term specified assets (i.e. bonds of NHAI or RECL or any other bond notified by Central Government in this behalf, redeemable after 5 years) to ` 50 lakhs, whether such investment is made during the relevant previous year or the subsequent previous year, or both. Therefore, in this case, the exemption under section 54EC can be availed only to the extent of ` 50 lakhs, provided the investment is made before 1.11.2024 (i.e., within six months from the date of transfer).

# Exemption of Long-term capital gains on sale of residential house

|Investment in one or two residential houses, as the case may be, in India|Investment in bonds of NHAI/RECL or any other notified bond|
|---|---|
|Exemption u/s 54|Exemption u/s 54EC*|
|Purchase within 1 year before or 2 years after and construction within 3 years after the date of transfer|Investment within 6 months from the date of transfer|
|Capital Gains or Cost of new house (subject to a maximum of ` 10 crore) whichever is lower, is exempt|Capital Gains or amount invested in bonds, whichever is lower, is exempt maximum upto ` 50 lakhs|

*The exemption under section 54EC is available in respect of capital gains on transfer of capital asset being land or building or both.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.435

# (v) Capital gains in case of investment in residential house [Section 54F]

# Eligible assessees: Individuals/ HUF

# Conditions to be fulfilled

- There must be transfer of a long-term capital asset, not being a residential house.
- Transfer of plot of land is also eligible for exemption.
- The assessee should -
- Purchase one residential house situated in India within a period of 1 year before or 2 years after the date of transfer; or
- Construct one residential house in India within 3 years from the date of transfer.
- If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then, the net sale consideration has to be deposited under the CGAS. (Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading). However, the net consideration in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS.
- Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase or construction of new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of new asset. The deemed cost of new asset would be restricted to ` 10 crores for the purpose of exemption under section 54F.
- The assessee should not own more than one residential house on the date of transfer.
- The assessee should not -
- purchase any other residential house within a period of 2 years or
- construct any other residential house within a period of 3 years from the date of transfer of the original asset.

# Quantum of exemption

- If cost of new residential house ≥ Net sale consideration of original asset, entire capital gains is exempt.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.436 INCOME TAX LAW

If cost of new residential house &lt; Net sale consideration of original asset, only proportionate capital gains is exempt i.e.

LTCG × Amount invested in new residential house / Net sale consideration

However, if the cost of new residential house/ amount invested in new residential house exceeds ₹ 10 crore, the amount exceeding ₹ 10 crore would not be taken into account for exemption.

# Example

|(1)|(2)|(3)|(4)|(5)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Net Consideration|LTCG computed|Cost of new residential house|or ₹ 10 crores, whichever is lower|Exempt LTCG|
|₹ 15 crore|₹ 7.5 crore|₹ 12 crore|₹ 10 crore|₹ 7.5 crore x 10/15 = ₹ 5 crore|
|₹ 20 crore|₹ 12 crore|₹ 15 crore|₹ 10 crore|₹ 12 crore x 10/20 = ₹ 6 crore|
|₹ 16 crore|₹ 12 crore|₹ 8 crore|₹ 8 crore|₹ 12 crore x 8/16 = ₹ 6 crore|
|₹ 10 crore|₹ 6 crore|₹ 10 crore|₹ 10 crore|₹ 6 crore x 10/10 = ₹ 6 crore|
|₹ 12 crore|₹ 6 crore|₹ 12 crore|₹ 10 crore|₹ 6 crore x 10/12 = ₹ 5 crore|

# Examples

1. If the net consideration is ₹ 9 crore, the capital gain is ₹ 4.50 crore and the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, is ₹ 5 crore, then, as per section 54F(4), the assessee can deposit the amount of ₹ 4 crore (i.e., ₹ 9 crore – ₹ 5 crore) not appropriated towards construction upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54F.

If the assessee has deposited, say, ₹ 3 crore on or before 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, the deemed cost of new residential house.
# CAPITAL GAINS

would be ` 8 crore (` 5 crore + ` 3 crore). The exemption u/s 54F would be ` 4 crore [i.e., ` 4.50 crore x ` 8 crore/` 9 crore].

2. If the net consideration is ` 15 crore, the capital gain is ` 7.50 crore and the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, is ` 6 crore, the assessee can deposit ` 4 crore [i.e., ` 10 crore – ` 6 crore] on or before 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54F. If the assessee has deposited, say, ` 3 crore on or before the due date of filing return u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of new residential house would be ` 9 crore (` 6 crore + ` 3 crore). The exemption u/s 54F would be ` 4.50 crore [i.e., ` 7.50 crore x ` 9 crore/` 15 crore].

Consequences where the assessee purchases any other residential house within a period of 2 years or constructs any other residential house within a period of 3 years from the date of transfer of original asset:

The capital gains exempt earlier under section 54F shall be deemed to be taxable as long-term capital gains in the previous year in which such residential house is purchased or constructed.

Consequences if the new house is transferred within a period of 3 years from the date of its purchase:

- Capital gains would arise on transfer of the new house; and
- The capital gains exempt earlier under section 54F would be taxable as long-term capital gains.

Note – In case the new residential house is sold after 2 years, the capital gains would be long-term capital gains.

# (vi) Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS)

Under sections 54, 54B, 54D and 54F, capital gains is exempt to the extent of investment of such gains/ net consideration (in the case of section 54F) in specified assets within the specified time. If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain or net consideration (in case of exemption under section 54F) has to be deposited under the CGAS. However, the capital gain in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54.
# 3.438 INCOME TAX LAW

and the net consideration in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54F.

# Time limit

Such deposit in CGAS should be made before filing the return of income or on or before the due date of filing the return of income, whichever is earlier. In such cases, the amount already utilized for purchase or construction of new asset plus the amount deposited under the CGAS on or before due date u/s 139(1) would be deemed to be the cost of new asset. However, for the purpose of sections 54 and 54F, the amount so deemed to be the cost of the new asset cannot exceed ` 10 crore.

Proof of such deposit should be attached with the return. The deposit can be withdrawn for utilization for the specified purposes in accordance with the scheme.

# Consequences if the amount deposited in CGAS is not utilized within the stipulated time of 2 years / 3 years

If the amount deposited is not utilized for the specified purpose within the stipulated period, then the unutilized amount shall be charged as capital gain of the previous year in which the specified period expires. In the case of section 54F, proportionate amount will be taxable.

CBDT Circular No.743 dated 6.5.96 clarifies that in the event of death of an individual before the stipulated period, the unutilized amount is not chargeable to tax in the hands of the legal heirs of the deceased individual. Such unutilized amount is not income but is a part of the estate devolving upon them.

# Extension of time for acquiring new asset or depositing or investing amount of Capital Gain [Section 54H]

In case of compulsory acquisition of the original asset, where the compensation is not received on the date of transfer, the period available for acquiring a new asset or making investment in CGAS under sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54EC and 54F would be considered from the date of receipt of such compensation and not from the date of the transfer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.439

# REFERENCE TO VALUATION OFFICER [SECTION 55A]

Section 55A provides that the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of a capital asset to a Valuation Officer in the following circumstances with a view to ascertaining the fair market value of the capital asset for the purposes of capital gains -

1. In a case where the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee is in accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer, if the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the value so claimed is at variance with its fair market value. Under this provision, the Assessing Officer can make a reference to the Valuation Officer in cases where the fair market value is taken to be the sale consideration of the asset. An Assessing Officer can also make a reference to the Valuation Officer in a case where the fair market value of the asset as on 01.04.2001 is taken as the cost of the asset, if he is of the view that there is any variation between the value as on 01.04.2001 claimed by the assessee in accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer and the fair market value of the asset on that date.
2. If the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the fair market value of the asset exceeds the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee by more than 15% of the value of asset as claimed or by more than ` 25,000 of the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee.
3. The Assessing Officer is of the opinion that, having regard to the nature of asset and other relevant circumstances, it is necessary to make the reference.

# TAX ON SHORT TERM CAPITAL GAINS IN RESPECT OF EQUITY SHARES/ UNITS OF AN EQUITY ORIENTED FUND [SECTION 111A]

1. Applicability of concessional rate of tax: This section provides for a concessional rate of tax on the short-term capital gains on transfer of -
# 3.440 INCOME TAX LAW

(2) a unit of a business trust¹⁰; or

(3) a unit of an equity oriented fund

# (ii) Concessional rate of tax in respect of STCG on transfer of certain assets:

The concessional rate of tax on the short-term capital in respect of transfer of above-mentioned assets is as follow:

|Date of transfer|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|before 23.7.2024|15%|
|on or after 23.7.2024|20%|

# (iii) Conditions:

The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate are –

1. the transaction of sale of such equity share or unit should be entered into on or after 1.10.2004, being the date on which Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 came into force; and
2. such transaction should be chargeable to securities transaction tax under the said Chapter.

However, short-term capital gains arising from transactions undertaken in foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 15% or 20%, as the case may be, even though STT is not leviable in respect of such transaction.

# (iii) Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit:

In the case of resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by any other income, then, such short-term capital gain will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance would be taxed at 15% or 20%, as the case may be. However, the benefit of availing the basic exemption limit is not available in the case of non-residents.

# (iv) No deduction under Chapter VI-A against STCG taxable under section 111A:

Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such short-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity

10 Chapter XII-FA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the related provisions dealing with the taxation aspects of business trust would be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.441 oriented mutual fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income of the assessee.

# 4.22 TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS

# [SECTION 112]

(i) Concessional rate of tax: Where the total income of an assessee includes long-term capital gains, tax is payable by the assessee at special rates on such long-term capital gains. The treatment of long-term capital gains in the hands of different types of assessees are as follows –

|S. No.|Long-term capital asset (LTCA)|Rate of tax|
|---|---|---|
|I.|Where transfer takes place before 23.7.2024| |
|(i)|Unlisted securities, or shares of a closely held company|Non-corporate non-resident/foreign company - 10% without the benefit of indexation and foreign currency fluctuation Other Assessees – 20% with indexation benefit|
|(ii)|Listed securities (other than a unit) or a zero-coupon bond|- 10% without indexation or - 20% with indexation benefit whichever is more beneficial to the assessee|
|(iii)|Other Assets (other than taxable u/s 112A)|- 20% with indexation benefit|
|II.|Where transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024| |
|(i)|Land or building or both if acquired before 23.7.2024|Individual or HUF, being a resident – 12.5% without indexation or 20% with indexation benefit, whichever is more beneficial to the assessee Other Assessees – 12.5% without indexation|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.442 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) - Land or building or both if 12.5% without indexation acquired on or after 23.7.2024 [In case of non-residents, LTCG on transfer of unlisted securities, or shares of a closely held company, would be taxable @12.5% without indexation and foreign currency fluctuation]

# Important Points to remember –

1. For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income (excluding long-term capital gains) is below the basic exemption limit, the unadjusted basic exemption limit can be reduced from the long-term capital gains. The remaining amount of long-term capital gains will be taxed at 20% (with indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation), depending on the date of transfer.
2. Debentures or Bonds: In respect of debentures or bonds (whether listed or unlisted) transferred or redeemed or matured before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed accordingly. If unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred or redeemed or matured on or after 23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the holding period. Indexation benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures, even if transferred before 23.07.2024.
3. Non-Residents and Foreign Companies: Long-term capital gains from the transfer of listed shares (other than listed equity shares covered u/s 112A) or debentures of an Indian company (acquired in foreign currency) will be taxed as follows:
- 20% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer takes place before 23.7.2024.
- 12.5% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024.
4. No Chapter VI-A deduction against LTCG: The provisions of section 112 make it clear that the deductions under Chapter VIA cannot be
# 4.23 TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS ON CERTAIN ASSETS [SECTION 112A]

(i) Applicability of concessional rate of tax: Section 112A provides that notwithstanding anything contained in section 112, a concessional rate of tax will be leviable on the long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 on transfer of –

- (a) an equity share in a company; or
- (b) a unit of a business trust; or
- (c) a unit of an equity oriented fund

(ii) Concessional rate of tax in respect of LTCG on transfer of certain assets: The concessional rate of tax on the long-term capital in respect of transfer of above-mentioned assets is as follows:

|Date of transfer|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|before 23.7.2024|10% on LTCG exceeding ` 1,25,000|
|on or after 23.7.2024|12.5% on LTCG exceeding ` 1,25,000|

However, the total exemption on LTCG in a previous year cannot exceed ` 1,25,000.

(iii) Conditions: The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate are –

- (a) In case of equity share in a company, STT has been paid on acquisition and transfer of such capital asset
- (b) In case of unit of an equity oriented fund or unit of business trust, STT has been paid on transfer of such capital asset.

However, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the nature of acquisition of equity share in a company on which the condition of payment of STT on acquisition would not be applicable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.444 INCOME TAX LAW

Further, long-term capital gains arising from transaction undertaken on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Service Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be, where the consideration for transfer is received or receivable in foreign currency, even though STT is not leviable in respect of such transaction.

# (iii) Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit:

In the case of resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by any other income, then such long-term capital gain exceeding ₹ 1,25,000 will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance would be taxed at 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be. However, the benefit of adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is not available in the case of non-residents.

# (iv) No deduction under Chapter VI-A against LTCG taxable under section 112A:

Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such long-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity oriented mutual fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income of the assessee.

# (v) No benefit of rebate under section 87A against LTCG taxable under section 112A:

Rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax payable @10% on LTCG under section 112A.

Subsequent to insertion of section 112A, the CBDT has issued clarification F. No. 370149/20/2018-TPL dated 04.02.2018 in the form of a Question and Answer format to clarify certain issues raised in different fora on various issues relating to the new tax regime for taxation of long-term capital gains. The relevant questions raised and answers to such questions as per the said Circular are given hereunder. [Answers to certain questions have been revised incorporating the effect of amendments by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024]:

# Q 1. What is the meaning of long term capital gains under the new tax regime for long term capital gains?

# Ans 1.

Long term capital gains mean gains arising from the transfer of long-term capital asset. It provides for a new long-term capital gains tax regime for the following assets–

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.445

1. Equity Shares in a company listed on a recognised stock exchange;
2. Unit of an equity oriented fund; and
3. Unit of a business trust.

The concessional tax rate u/s 112A applies to the above assets, if–

1. the assets mentioned in (i) and (ii) are held for a period of “more than 12 months” from the date of acquisition and the asset mentioned in (iii) is held for a period of “more than 36 months” if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024. However, the period of holding would be “more than 12 months” if transfer of any of above assets take place on or after 23.7.2024.; and
2. the Securities Transaction Tax (STT) is paid at the time of transfer. However, in the case of equity shares acquired after 1.10.2004, STT is required to be paid even at the time of acquisition (subject to notified exemptions).

# Q 2. What is the point of chargeability of the tax?

Ans 2. The tax will be levied only upon transfer of the long-term capital asset on or after 1st April, 2018, as defined in clause (47) of section 2 of the Act.

# Q 3. What is the method for calculation of long-term capital gains?

Ans 3. The long-term capital gains will be computed by deducting the cost of acquisition from the full value of consideration on transfer of the long-term capital asset.

# Q 4. How do we determine the cost of acquisition for assets acquired on or before 31st January, 2018?

Ans 4. The cost of acquisition for the long-term capital asset acquired on or before 31st of January, 2018 will be the actual cost. However, if the actual cost is less than the fair market value of such asset as on 31st of January, 2018, the fair market value will be deemed to be the cost of acquisition. Further, if the full value of consideration on transfer is less than the fair market value, then such full value of consideration or the actual cost, whichever is higher, will be deemed to be the cost of acquisition.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.446 INCOME TAX LAW

# Q 5.

Please provide illustrations for computing long-term capital gains in different scenarios, in the light of answers to questions 4.

# Ans 5.

The computation of long-term capital gains in different scenarios is illustrated as under:

# Scenario 1

An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of April, 2024 at ` 250. As the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018, the fair market value of ` 200 will be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be ` 50 (` 250 – ` 200).

# Scenario 2

An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of April, 2024 at ` 150. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018. However, the sale value is also less than the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018. Accordingly, the sale value of ` 150 will be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be NIL (` 150 – ` 150).

# Scenario 3

An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 50 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of April, 2024 at ` 150. In this case, the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018 is less than the actual cost of acquisition, and therefore, the actual cost of ` 100 will be taken as actual cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be ` 50 (` 150 – ` 100).

# Scenario 4

An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of April, 2024 at ` 50. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair market value as on 31st January, 2018. The sale value is less than the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018 and also the actual cost of acquisition. Therefore, the actual cost of ` 100 will be taken as the cost of acquisition in this case. Hence, the long-term capital loss will be ` 50 (` 50 – ` 100) in this case.

# Q 6.

Whether the cost of acquisition will be inflation indexed?

# Ans 6.

Third proviso to section 48, provides that the long-term capital gain will be computed without giving effect to the provisions of the second provisos of section 48. Accordingly, it is clarified that the benefit of inflation indexation.
# CAPITAL GAINS

of the cost of acquisition would not be available for computing long-term capital gains.

Note – This is irrespective of whether the transfer takes place before or on or after 23.7.2024.

# Q 7. What will be the tax treatment of transfer made on or after 1st April 2018?

Ans 7. The long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 arising from transfer of listed equity shares/ units of equity oriented fund/business trust on or after 1st April, 2018 will be taxed at 10% (where transfer is made before 23.7.2024) or 12.5% (where transfer is made on or after 23.7.2024), as the case may be. However, there will be no tax on gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018.

# Q8. What is the date from which the holding period will be counted?

Ans 8. The holding period will be counted from the date of acquisition.

# Q9. Whether tax will be deducted at source in case of gains by resident tax payer?

Ans 9. No. There will be no deduction of tax at source from the payment of long-term capital gains to a resident tax payer.

# Q10. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of bonus shares acquired before 1st February 2018?

Ans 10. The cost of acquisition of bonus shares acquired before 31st January, 2018 will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac). Therefore, the fair market value of the bonus shares as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of acquisition (except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence, the gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt¹¹.

# Q11. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of right share acquired before 1st February 2018?

Ans 11. The cost of acquisition of right share acquired before 31st January, 2018 will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac). Therefore, the fair market value

11Subject to the notification issued by the Central Government to specify the nature of acquisition of equity share in a company on which the condition of payment of STT on acquisition would not be applicable. This notification will be discussed at Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.448 INCOME TAX LAW

of right share as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of acquisition (except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence, the gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt¹³.

# Q12. What will be the treatment of long-term capital loss arising from transfer made on or after 1st April, 2018?

Ans 12. Long-term capital loss arising from transfer made on or after 1st April, 2018 will be allowed to be set-off and carried forward in accordance with existing provisions of the Act. Therefore, it can be set-off against any other long-term capital gains and unabsorbed loss can be carried forward to subsequent eight years for set-off against long-term capital gains.

# ILLUSTRATION 13

Calculate the income-tax liability for the assessment year 2025-26 in the following cases:

| |Mr. A|Mrs. B|Mr. C|Mr. D|
|---|---|---|---|---|
| |(age 45)|(age 62)|(age 81)|(age 82)|
|Status|Non-resident|Non-resident|Resident|Non-resident|
|Total income other than long-term capital gain|2,40,000|3,10,000|5,90,000|4,80,000|
|Long-term capital gain|85,000|10,000|60,000|Nil|
|[Assume transfer took place before 23.7.2024]|from sale of vacant site|from sale of equity shares (STT paid on sale and purchase of shares)|from sale of agricultural land in rural area| |

(i) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D pay tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

(ii) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# SOLUTION

(i) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D pay tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

# Computation of income-tax liability for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Mr. A (age 45)|Mrs. B (age 62)|Mr. C (age 81)|Mr. D (age 82)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Residential Status|Non-resident|Non-resident|Resident|Non-resident| |
|Applicable basic exemption limit|₹ 3,00,000|₹ 3,00,000|₹ 3,00,000|₹ 3,00,000| |
|Asset sold|Vacant site|Listed equity shares (STT paid on both sale and purchase of shares)|Rural agricultural land|-| |
|Long-term capital gain (on sale of above asset)|₹ 85,000|₹ 10,000|₹ 60,000|-| |
|Taxable|@20% u/s 112|[exempt u/s 112A since it is less than ₹ 1,25,000]|(Exempt – not a capital asset)|-| |
|Other income|₹ 2,40,000|₹ 3,10,000|₹ 5,90,000|₹ 4,80,000| |
|Tax liability|On LTCG|₹ 17,000|-|-|-|
|On Other income|Nil|₹ 500|₹ 14,500|₹ 9,000| |
|Total|₹ 17,000|₹ 500|₹ 14,500|₹ 9,000| |
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A|-|-|₹ 14,500|-| |
|Total after rebate|₹ 17,000|₹ 500|Nil|₹ 9,000| |
|Add: Health & education cess (HEC) @4%|₹ 680|₹ 20|Nil|₹ 360| |
|Total tax liability|₹ 17,680|₹ 520|Nil|₹ 9,360| |

Note: Since Mr. C is a resident whose total income does not exceed ₹ 7 lakhs, he is eligible for rebate of ₹ 25,000 or the actual tax payable, whichever is lower, under section 87A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.450 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

# Computation of income-tax liability for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Mr. A|Mrs. B|Mr. C|Mr. D| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(age 45)|(age 62)|(age 81)|(age 82)| | |
|Residential Status|Non-resident|Non-resident|Resident|Non-resident| |
|Applicable basic exemption limit|₹ 2,50,000|₹ 2,50,000|₹ 5,00,000|₹ 2,50,000| |
|Asset sold|Vacant site|Listed equity shares (STT paid on both sale and purchase of shares)|Rural agricultural land|-| |
|Long-term capital gain (on sale of above asset)|₹ 85,000|₹ 10,000|₹ 60,000|-| |
|[Taxable @20% u/s 112]|[exempt u/s 112A since it is less than ₹ 1,25,000]|(Exempt – not a capital asset)|-| | |
|Other income|₹ 2,40,000|₹ 3,10,000|₹ 5,90,000|₹ 4,80,000| |
|Tax liability|On LTCG|₹ 17,000|-|-|-|
|On Other income|Nil|₹ 3,000|₹ 18,000|₹ 11,500| |
| |₹ 17,000|₹ 3,000|₹ 18,000|₹ 11,500| |
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A|-|-|-|-| |
| |₹ 17,000|₹ 3,000|₹ 18,000|₹ 11,500| |
|Add: Health & education cess (HEC) @4%|₹ 680|₹ 120|₹ 720|₹ 460| |
|Total tax liability|₹ 17,680|₹ 3,120|₹ 18,720|₹ 11,960| |

# Notes:

Since Mrs. B and Mr. D are non-residents, they cannot avail the higher basic exemption limit of ₹ 3,00,000 and ₹ 5,00,000 for persons over the age of 60 years and 80 years, respectively. Also, they along with Mr. A, being non-residents are not eligible for rebate under section 87A even though their total income does not exceed ₹ 5 lakh.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# LET US RECAPITULATE

# Scope and year of chargeability [Section 45]

Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year will be chargeable to tax under the head ‘Capital Gains’, and shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place [Section 45(1)]

|Section|Profits and gains arising from the following transactions chargeable as income|P.Y. in which income is chargeable to tax|Deemed Full Value of consideration for computation of capital gains under section 48|
|---|---|---|---|
|45(1A)|Money or other asset received under an insurance from an insurer on account of damage/destruction of any capital asset, as a result of, flood, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or other convulsion of nature, riot or civil disturbance, accidental fire or explosion, action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy|The previous year in which such money or other asset is received.|The value of money or the fair market value of other asset received.|
|45(2)|Transfer by way of conversion by the owner of a capital asset into stock-in-trade of a business carried on by him.|The previous year in which such stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred by him|The fair market value of the capital asset on the date of such conversion|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.452 INCOME TAX LAW

|45(5)|Transfer by way of compulsory acquisition under any law, or a transfer, the consideration for which was determined or approved by the Central Government or RBI|
|---|---|
| |If the compensation or consideration is further enhanced by any court, Tribunal or other authority, the enhanced amount will be deemed to be the income|
| |However, any amount of compensation received in pursuance of an interim order of a court, Tribunal or other authority shall be deemed to be income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” of the previous year in which the final order of such court, Tribunal or other authority is made.|

The previous year in which the consideration or amount was first received.

The previous year in which the compensation or consideration is enhanced by any court, Tribunal or other authority, the amount by which the compensation or consideration is enhanced. For this purpose cost of acquisition and cost of improvement shall be taken as ‘Nil’.
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.453

# Definitions [Section 2]

|Section|Term|Definition|
|---|---|---|
|2(14)|Capital Asset|Capital Asset means – (a) property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession; (b) any securities held by a Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested in such securities in accordance with the regulations made under the SEBI Act, 1992.|

# Exclusions from the definition of Capital Asset:

- Stock in trade [other than securities referred to in (b) above], raw materials or consumables held for the purposes of business or profession;
- Personal effects except jewellery, archeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures or any work of art;
- Rural agricultural land in India i.e. agricultural land not situated within specified urban limits.

The agricultural land described in (a) and (b) below, being land situated within the specified urban limits, would fall within the definition of “capital asset”, and transfer of such land would attract capital gains tax -

- (a) agricultural land situated in any area within the jurisdiction of a municipality or cantonment board having population of not less than ten thousand, or
- (b) agricultural land situated in any area within such distance, measured aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown hereunder -

|Shortest distance from local limits|Population according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year.|
|---|---|
|≤ 2 kms|> 10,000|
|> 2 kms but ≤ 6 kms|> 1,00,000|
|> 6 kms but ≤ 8 kms|> 10,00,000|

Gold Deposits Bonds issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates
# 3.454 INCOME TAX LAW

issued under the Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2015 and Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2018 notified by the Central Government;

6½% Gold Bonds, 1977 or 7% Gold Bonds, 1980 or National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, issued by the Central Government;

Special Bearer Bonds, 1991 issued by the Central Government.

Note: ‘Property’ includes and shall be deemed to have always included any rights in or in relation to an Indian company, including rights of management or control or any other rights whatsoever.

# 2(42A)/2 Short-term capital asset/long-term capital asset

|Capital Asset|STCG, if held for|LTCG, if held for|
|---|---|---|
|In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024|- Security (other than unit) listed in a recognized stock exchange
- Unit of equity oriented fund/unit of UTI
- Zero Coupon bond
- Unlisted shares
- Land or building or both
- Unlisted securities other than shares
- Other capital assets
|- ≤ 12 months
- ≤ 24 months
- ≤ 36 months
- immediately preceding the date of its transfer
|
|In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024|- Security listed in a recognized stock exchange
|- ≤ 12 months
- immediately preceding the date of its transfer
|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.455

- Unit of equity-oriented fund/unit of UTI
- Zero Coupon bond
- Other capital assets

| |≤ 24 months|> 24 months|
|---|---|---|
|immediately preceding the date of its transfer| | |
|immediately preceding the date of its transfer| | |

Note – As per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer of the following assets would always be short-term capital irrespective of the period of holding of such assets:

- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024.

# Transactions not regarded as transfer [Section 47]: Some Examples

- Any distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of a HUF
- Any transfer of capital asset by an individual or HUF under a gift or will or an irrevocable trust (by any person upto A.Y. 2024-25)
- Any transfer of capital asset by a holding company to its 100% subsidiary Indian company or by a subsidiary company to its 100% holding Indian company
- Any transfer or issue of shares by the resulting company, in a scheme of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged company
- Any transfer by a shareholder in a scheme of amalgamation of shares held by him in the amalgamating company
- Any transfer by an individual of sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI by way of redemption
- Any transfer of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt into gold.
- Any transfer by way of conversion of bonds, debentures, debenture stock, deposit certificates of a company, into shares or debentures of that company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.456 INCOME TAX LAW

Any transfer by way of conversion of preference shares of a company into equity shares of that company

Any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government

# Mode of computation of Capital Gains [Section 48]

# Computation of long-term capital gains

# Where transfer takes place before 23.7.2024

|Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer|xx|
|---|---|
|Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale)|xx|
|Net Sale Consideration|xx|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition and indexed cost of improvement|xx|
|However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A [i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]|However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A [i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]|
|Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F|xx|
|Long-term capital gains|xx|

# Where transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024

|Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer|xx|
|---|---|
|Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale)|xx|
|Net Sale Consideration|xx|
|Less: Cost of acquisition and Cost of improvement|xx|
|However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A [i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]|However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A [i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]|
|Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F|xx|
|Long-term capital gains|xx|

# Notes:

(i) Deduction on account of securities transaction tax paid will not be allowed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                  CAPITAL GAINS             3.457
 (ii)   Indexed Cost of Acquisition =
          Cost of      ×    CII for the year in which the asset is transferred
         acquisition       CII for the year in which the asset was first held by
                           the assessee or 2001-02, whichever is later
 (iii)  Indexed Cost of Improvement =
          Cost of      ×   CII for the year in which the asset is transferred
         improvement       CII for the year in which the improvement took
                           place
 (iv) As per section 48, benefit of indexation is available only on transfers of
        long-term capital assets which takes place before 23.7.2024 other than
         -     on bonds or debentures (excluding capital indexed bonds issued by
           the Government and sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI) or
         - on  shares or debentures   of an  Indian Co.  acquired  by a     non-
           resident in foreign currency.
         However, a resident individual or a HUF is given an option to take the
         benefit of indexation in respect of land or building acquired before
         23.7.2024 and transferred on or after the said date, for the purposes of
         computation of tax liability under section 112.
         [Where land or building or both, being a long-term capital asset, acquired
         before 23.7.2024, is transferred on or after 23.7.2024, the long-term capital
         gain forming part of gross total income/total income has to be computed
         without indexation benefit i.e., only cost of acquisition/cost of improvement
         will be reduced from net consideration and not indexed cost of acquisition/
         indexed cost of improvement. The benefit of indexation would be given
         only while computing tax liability u/s 112, if tax @20% on LTCG computed
         with indexation benefit is more beneficial to the resident individual/HUF
         than tax @12.5% on LTCG computed without indexation benefit.
 Computation of short-term capital gains
  Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of      xxx
  transfer
  Less:  Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection
  with such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale)                           xxx
  (Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)
  Net Sale Consideration                                               xxx
  Less: Cost of acquisition and cost of improvement                     xxx
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.458 INCOME TAX LAW

However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed on account of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A [i.e., under the provisions of sections 80EE/80EEA]

Less: Exemption under sections 54B/54D xxx

Short-term capital gains xxx

# Capital Gains: Special Provisions

|Section|Particulars|
|---|---|
|50|Any income from transfer of depreciable assets is deemed to be capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital assets, irrespective of the period of holding (i.e., indexation benefit would not be available even if the period of holding of such assets is more than 36 months).|
|50AA|Any income from transfer of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or Market Linked Debenture or unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024 is deemed to be capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital assets.|
|50B|Capital Gains on Slump Sale Any profits and gains arising from slump sale effected in the previous year shall be chargeable to income-tax as capital gains arising from the transfer of capital assets and shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place. Where the undertaking being transferred under slump sale is held for more than 36 months, the resultant gain is long-term; However, no indexation benefit would be available. If the undertaking is held for less than 36 months, the resultant gain is short-term. Net worth is deemed to be the cost of acquisition and the cost of improvement - ‘Net worth’ shall be aggregate value of total assets minus value of liabilities of such undertaking as per books of account. Fair market value is deemed to be the full value of consideration - Fair market value of the capital asset as on the date of transfer, calculated in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital asset.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

Accordingly, the CBDT has prescribed that, for the purpose of section 50B(2)(ii), the fair market value (FMV) of capital assets would be the higher of –

1. FMV 1, being the fair market value of capital assets transferred by way of slump sale (determined on the date of slump sale); and
2. FMV 2, being the fair market value of the consideration (monetary and non-monetary) received or accruing as a result of transfer by way of slump sale

Capital gains = Fair market value – Net Worth

Aggregate value of total assets would be the aggregate of the following :

1. Written Down Value of depreciable assets;
2. Nil, in case of self generated goodwill
3. Nil, in case of capital assets in respect of which the whole of the expenditure has been allowed or is allowable as deduction under section 35AD; and
4. Book value for other assets.

Revaluation of assets shall be ignored for computing Net Worth.

# 50C Computation of capital gains on sale of land or building or both

|Sl. No.|Condition|Deemed Sale Consideration|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Stamp Duty Value > Actual Consideration|If Stamp Duty Value > 110% of actual consideration|
| | |If Stamp Duty Value ≤ 110% of Actual sale consideration|
|2.|Actual Consideration > Stamp Duty Value|Actual Sale Consideration|
|3.|Value ascertained by Valuation Officer > Stamp Duty Value|Stamp Duty Value|
|4.|Value ascertained by Valuation Officer < Stamp Duty Value|Value ascertained by Valuation Officer|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.460 INCOME TAX LAW

Note – If the date of agreement is different from the date of transfer, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be considered, if whole or part of the consideration is received by way of account payee cheque/bank draft or ECS or prescribed electronic modes (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, Net banking, debit card, credit card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on or before the date of agreement. Otherwise, stamp duty value on the date of transfer has to be considered.

# 50CA

Fair Market Value deemed to be full value of consideration in case of transfer of unlisted shares in certain cases

If consideration received or accruing as a FMV of such share result of transfer of unquoted share determined in the FMV of such share determined in the prescribed manner would be deemed as the full value of consideration. The provisions of this section would not, however, be applicable to any consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer by such class of persons and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

# 50D

Fair Market Value deemed to be full value of consideration in certain cases

Where the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of a capital asset by an assessee is not ascertainable or cannot be determined, FMV of the said asset on the date of transfer would be deemed as the full value of consideration.

# 51

Advance money received and forfeited upto 31.3.2014

Where the assessee has received advance money on an earlier occasion for transfer of capital asset, but the transfer could not be effected due to failure of negotiations, then, the advance money forfeited by the assessee has to be reduced from the cost of acquisition (and indexation would be calculated on the cost so reduced) while computing capital gains, when the capital asset is transferred or sold.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

Advance money received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014

Such advance money received on or after 1.4.2014 would be taxable under section 56(2) under the head “Income from other sources”. Therefore, advance money received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014 should not be deducted from the cost for determining the indexed cost of acquisition while computing capital gains arising on transfer of the asset.

# 111A Tax on short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares and units of equity oriented fund on which STT is chargeable

Any short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares or units of an equity oriented fund on which securities transaction tax has been paid on such sale shall be liable to tax @15% if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 and @ 20% if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024.

In case of resident individuals and HUF, the short-term capital gain shall be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and the balance shall be taxed at 15%/20%, as the case may be, depending on the date of transfer.

No deduction under Chapter VI-A can be claimed in respect of such short-term capital gain.

Short-term capital gains arising from transaction undertaken in foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 15%/20%, as the case may be, even when STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.

# 112 Long-term capital asset (LTCA)

|In case of transfer took place before 23.7.2024|Rate of tax|
|---|---|
|Unlisted securities, or shares of a closely held company|10%|
|foreign company - without the benefit of indexation and currency fluctuation| |
|Other Assessees – with indexation benefit|20%|

¹² In case of transfer of bonds and debentures, whether listed or unlisted, indexation benefit would not be available.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.462 INCOME TAX LAW

|Listed securities (other than a unit) or a zero-coupon bond|- 10% without indexation or|- 20% with indexation benefit|
|---|---|---|
|Other Assets|- 20% with indexation benefit| |
|In case of transfer took place on or after 23.7.2024|In case of transfer took place on or after 23.7.2024|In case of transfer took place on or after 23.7.2024|
|Land or building or both if Individual or HUF,|– 12.5% without indexation or|20% with indexation benefit, whichever is more beneficial to the assessee|
|Other Assessees|– 12.5% without indexation| |
|- Land or building or both if acquired on or after 23.7.2024|12.5% without indexation| |
|- Other Assets| | |
|For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income (excluding long-term capital gains) is below the basic exemption limit, the unadjusted basic exemption limit can be reduced from the long-term capital gains. The remaining amount of long-term capital gains will be taxed at 20% (with indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation), depending on the date of transfer.|For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income (excluding long-term capital gains) is below the basic exemption limit, the unadjusted basic exemption limit can be reduced from the long-term capital gains. The remaining amount of long-term capital gains will be taxed at 20% (with indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation), depending on the date of transfer.|For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income (excluding long-term capital gains) is below the basic exemption limit, the unadjusted basic exemption limit can be reduced from the long-term capital gains. The remaining amount of long-term capital gains will be taxed at 20% (with indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation), depending on the date of transfer.|
|Debentures or Bonds:|In respect of debentures or bonds (whether listed or unlisted) transferred or redeemed or matured before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed accordingly. If unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred or redeemed or matured on or after 23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the holding period. Indexation benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures, even if transferred before 23.07.2024.|In respect of debentures or bonds (whether listed or unlisted) transferred or redeemed or matured before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed accordingly. If unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred or redeemed or matured on or after 23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the holding period. Indexation benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures, even if transferred before 23.07.2024.|
|Non-Residents and Foreign Companies:|Long-term capital gains from the transfer of listed shares or debentures of an Indian company (acquired in foreign currency) will be taxed as follows:|Long-term capital gains from the transfer of listed shares or debentures of an Indian company (acquired in foreign currency) will be taxed as follows:|

# CAPITAL GAINS

3.463

- 20% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer occurs before 23.7.2024.
- 12.5% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer occurs on or after 23.7.2024.

No Chapter VI-A deduction against LTCG: The provisions of section 112 make it clear that the deductions under Chapter VIA cannot be availed in respect of the long-term capital gains included in the total income of the assessee.

# 112A Tax on long-term capital gains on certain assets

Any long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 on transfer of equity shares or units of an equity oriented fund shall be liable to tax @10% on such capital gain where the transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 and @12.5% on capital gains where transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024, if securities transaction tax has been paid on acquisition and such sale in case of equity share, and on such sale in case of units of an equity oriented mutual fund.

In case of resident individuals and HUF, the long-term capital gain shall be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and the balance shall be taxed at 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be.

No deduction under Chapter VI-A or rebate under section 87A can be claimed in respect of such long-term capital gain.

Long-term capital gains (in excess of ` 1,25,000) arising from transaction undertaken on a recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be, where the consideration for transfer is received or receivable in foreign currency, even when STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.
# 3.464 INCOME TAX LAW

# Cost of Acquisition [Section 55]

|Sl. No.|Nature of asset|Cost of acquisition|
|---|---|---|
|1|Goodwill of business or profession, trademark, brand name or any other intangible asset etc.,|- Self generated: Nil
- Acquired from previous owner: Purchase price
- However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession, in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20): Purchase price as reduced by the total amount of depreciation obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).
- became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (by any person upto 31.3.2024, by succession, inheritance, distribution of assets on liquidation of a company, etc. and previous owner has acquired it by purchase: However, in case of capital asset, being goodwill of a business or profession which was acquired by the previous owner by purchase and in respect of which depreciation u/s 32(1) has been obtained by the assessee in any P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20).
- The cost of improvement of such assets would be Nil.
|
|2|Bonus shares|- If bonus shares are allotted before 1.4.2001: FMV on 1.4.2001
- If bonus shares are allotted on or after 1.4.2001: Nil
|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.465

# Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer

The higher of –

1. Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of bonus shares allotted before 1.4.2001)
2. Lower of –

# 3. Rights Shares

Original shares (which forms the basis of entitlement of rights shares)

Amount actually paid for acquiring the original shares

Rights shares subscribed for by the assessee

Amount actually paid for acquiring the rights shares

Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a person)

Nil

Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the assessee has renounced the rights entitlement

Purchase price paid to the renouncer of rights entitlement as well as the amount paid to the Co. which has allotted the rights shares.

# 4. Long term capital assets being,

- equity shares in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of purchase and transfer
- unit of equity oriented fund on which STT is paid at the time of transfer.

Cost of acquisition shall be the higher of -

1. cost of acquisition of such asset; and
2. lower of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.466 INCOME TAX LAW

# 5. Any other capital asset

Where such capital asset became the property of the assessee before 1.4.2001 Cost of the asset to the assessee, or FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option of the assessee. However, in case of capital asset being land or building, FMV as on 1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp duty value as on 1.4.2001.

Where capital assets became the property of the assessee by way of distribution of assets on total or partial partition of HUF, under a gift or will, by succession, inheritance by an individual or HUF (by any person upto 31.3.2024), distribution of assets on liquidation of a company, etc. and the capital asset became the property of the previous owner before 1.4.2001. The provisions contained in (5) above shall also apply to the assets mentioned in (3) and (4) above.

Cost of the property in the hands of previous owner cannot be ascertained. The FMV on the date on which the capital asset become the property of the previous owner would be considered as cost of acquisition.

# Cost of improvement of certain assets [Section 55]

|Sl. No.|Nature of asset|Cost of improvement|
|---|---|---|
|1|Goodwill or any other intangible asset of a business, right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, right to carry on any business or profession or any other right.|Nil|
|2|Where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner or the|All expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any addition or alteration to the capital asset on or|

# CAPITAL GAINS

3.467

assessee before 1-4-2001 after 1.4.2001 by the previous owner or the assessee.

# 3

In relation to any other capital asset All capital expenditure incurred in making additions or alterations to the capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 –

- by the assessee after it became his property; and
- by the previous owner [in a case where the assessee acquired the property by modes specified in section 49(1)].

# Capital Gains: Exemptions under section 10

|Section|Particulars|
|---|---|
|10(37)|Where any individual or HUF owns urban agricultural land which has been used for agricultural purposes for a period of two years immediately preceding the date of transfer by such individual or a parent of his or by such HUF and the same is compulsorily acquired under any law or the consideration for such transfer is determined or approved by the Central Government or the RBI, resultant capital gain will be exempt provided the compensation or consideration for such transfer is received on or after 1.4.2004.|
|10(43)|The amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in installments, in a transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income-tax.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# Exemption of Capital Gains [Sections 54 to 54F]

|Section 54F|Assessee should own more than one residential house on the date of transfer.|Residential|2|not construct another house within 3 years after the date of transfer.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Section 54EC|Any assessee|should purchase another house.|One|Bonds of NHAI or RECL or any other|
|Section 54D|Any assessee|should be used for industrial undertaking|business immediately preceding the date of transfer.| |
|Section 54B|Individual/Agricultural|Land used for agricultural purposes|should be used by parents for 2 years immediately preceding the date of transfer.| |
|Section 54|Residential|should be chargeable under the head “Income from house property”| | |

# Particulars

|S. No.|Eligible Asset|Conditions|Other Conditions|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|LTCA|Assessee should have|Qualifying asset|
|2|Residential house|from the date of transfer.| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

| | | |Residential House|≥|new|original asset, entire| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|years after the date|years after the date|of|sale|sale| | | | | | |
|1|2|3|gain|consideration| | | | | | |
|Purchase|year|(or)|Cost|Net|Net|Capital| | | | |
|India|6|the|Purchase|within a|or|or| | | | |
|by|C.G. (Redeemable|date of transfer|after|Gain|Gain|is| | | | |
|notified|after 5 years)|of|transfer|specified|specified|investment| | | | |
|bond|months|period|Capital|Capital|lower.| | | | | |
| |existing|new|new|asset or Capital|is| | | | | |
|Purchase/|construct|the|3|shifting|setting|of| | | | |
|of|after|the|new|Cost|Cost|new| | | | |
| | |new|is|is|Land or Capital|whichever|is|lower.| | |
|(Urban/ Rural)|2|of|agricultural|purpose|Purchase|period| | | | |
|within|date|of|transfer|of|Cost|Cost| | | | |
| | | | |whichever|is|lower,|Gain,|lower,|whichever is lower,| |
|the|capital gains does| |Housethe|case may be or|houses,|is exempt.| | | | |
|India/Two|India, assessee,|Purchase|construct|2 crore|in|option| | | | |
|not|year|(or)|Cost|Cost|or| | | | | |
|capital gains|limit|of|purchase/|Amount|Amount| | | | | |
|in|which to invested|asset|has|Time|for|5| | | | |
| | | |6|6| | | | | | |

# INCOME TAX LAW

3.470

|asset|amount taken into account|
|---|---|
|Residential House|the crore would not be|
|new|of 10 crore,|
|sale is|house 10|
|new|gain|
|proportionate|` for exemption.|
|of consideration if|of residential|
|However,`|exceeding|
|original exempt.|Cost|
|Net|capital|
|cost|the|
|investment is made|in the current FY or|
|in any financial year|such|
|lakhs,|lakhs,|
|FY|50|
|50|`|
|is|is|
|crore, the amount|that|
|new|new|
|10|10|
|into The|can be claimed by|
|the|house not for|
|if|`|
|would|assessee|
|exemption.|of|
|of residential|10 crore.|
|However,|exceeding|
|maximum|cost|
|cost|crore|
|the|be|
|`| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Mithun purchased 100 equity shares of M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. on 01-04-2007 at rate of ` 1,000 per share in public issue of the company by paying securities transaction tax. Company allotted bonus shares in the ratio of 1:1 on 01.12.2023. He has also received dividend of ` 10 per share on 01.05.2024. He has sold all the shares on 01.10.2024 at the rate of ` 4,000 per share through a recognized stock exchange and paid brokerage of 1% and securities transaction tax of 0.02%. Compute his total income and tax liability for A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. Mithun pays tax under default tax regime, assuming that he is having other income of ` 8,00,000. Fair market value of shares of M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. on 31.1.2018 is ` 2,000.
2. Aarav converts his plot of land purchased in July, 2004 for ` 80,000 into stock-in-trade on 31ˢᵗ March, 2024. The fair market value as on 31.3.2024 was ` 3,00,000. The stock-in-trade was sold for ` 3,25,000 in the month of January, 2025. Find out the taxable income, if any, and if so under which head of income and for which Assessment Year? Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2004-05: 113; F.Y. 2023-24: 348; F.Y. 2024-25: 363.
3. Mrs. Harshita purchased a land at a cost of ` 35 lakhs in the F.Y. 2004-05 and held the same as her capital asset till 20th March, 2024. She started her real estate business on 21st March, 2024 and converted the said land into stock-in-trade of her business on the said date, when the fair market value of the land was ` 210 lakhs. She constructed 15 flats of equal size, quality and dimension. Cost of construction of each flat is ` 10 lakhs. Construction was completed in February, 2025. She sold 10 flats at ` 30 lakhs per flat in March, 2025. The remaining 5 flats were held in stock as on 31st March, 2025.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.472 INCOME TAX LAW

She invested ` 50 lakhs in bonds issued by National Highways Authority of India on 31st March, 2025 and another ` 50 lakhs in bonds of Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. in April, 2025.

Compute the amount of chargeable capital gain and business income in the hands of Mrs. Harshita arising from the above transactions for A.Y. 2025-26 indicating clearly the reasons for treatment for each item.

[Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2004-05: 113; F.Y. 2023-24: 348; F.Y. 2024-25: 363].

# 4.

Mr. A is an individual carrying on business. His stock and machinery were damaged and destroyed in a fire accident which occurred in December 2024. The value of stock lost (total damaged) was ` 6,50,000. Certain portion of the machinery could be salvaged. The opening balance of the block as on 1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV as on 31.3.2024 after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24) was ` 10,80,000.

During the process of safeguarding machinery and in the fire fighting operations, Mr. A lost his gold chain and a diamond ring, which he had purchased in April, 2005 for ` 1,20,000. The market value of these two items as on the date of fire accident was ` 1,80,000.

Mr. A received the following amounts from the insurance company:

|(i)|Towards loss of stock|` 4,80,000|
|---|---|---|
|(ii)|Towards damage of machinery|` 6,00,000|
|(iii)|Towards gold chain and diamond ring|` 1,80,000|

You are requested to briefly comment on the tax treatment of the above three items under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

# 5.

Mr. Sarthak entered into an agreement with Mr. Jaikumar to sell his residential house located at Kanpur on 16.08.2024 for ` 1,50,00,000. The sale proceeds were to be paid in the following manner:

|(i)|20% through account payee bank draft on the date of agreement.|
|---|---|
|(ii)|60% on the date of the possession of the property.|
|(iii)|Balance after the completion of the registration of the title to the property.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

Mr. Jaikumar was handed over the possession of the property on 15.12.2024 and the registration process was completed on 14.01.2025. He paid the sale proceeds as per the sale agreement.

The value determined by the Stamp Duty Authority-

- (a) on 16.08.2024 was ` 1,70,00,000;
- (b) on 15.12.2024 was ` 1,71,00,000; and
- (c) on 14.01.2025 was ` 1,71,50,000.

Mr. Sarthak had acquired the residential house at Kanpur on 01.04.2001 for ` 30,00,000. After recovering the sale proceeds from Jaikumar, he purchased two residential house properties, one in Kanpur for ` 20,00,000 on 24.3.2025 and another in Delhi for ` 35,00,000 on 28.5.2025.

Compute the income chargeable under the head "Capital Gains" of Mr. Sarthak for the Assessment Year 2025-26.

Cost Inflation Index for Financial Year(s): 2001-02 - 100; 2024-25 - 363

# 6.

Mrs. Yuvika bought a vacant land for ` 80 lakhs in May 2005. Registration and other expenses were 10% of the cost of land. She constructed a residential building on the said land for ` 100 lakhs during the financial year 2007-08.

She entered into an agreement for sale of the above said residential house with Mr. Johar (not a relative) in April 2015. The sale consideration was fixed at ` 700 lakhs and on 23-4-2015, Mrs. Yuvika received ` 20 lakhs as advance in cash by executing an agreement. However, due to failure on part of Mr. Johar, the said negotiation could not materialise and hence, the said amount of advance was forfeited by Mrs. Yuvika.

Mrs. Yuvika, again entered into an agreement on 01.05.2024 for sale of this house at ` 810 lakhs. She received ` 80 lakhs as advance by RTGS. The stamp duty value on the date of agreement was ` 890 lakhs. The sale deed was executed and registered on 14-07-2024 for the agreed consideration. However, the State stamp valuation authority had revised the values, hence, the value of property for stamp duty purposes was ` 900 lakhs. Mrs. Yuvika paid 1% as brokerage on sale consideration received.

Subsequent to sale, Mrs. Yuvika made following acquisition/investments:
# 3.474 INCOME TAX LAW

1. Acquired two residential houses at Delhi and Chandigarh for ` 130 lakhs and ` 50 lakhs, respectively, on 31.1.2025 and 15.5.2025
2. Acquired a residential house at UK for ` 180 lakhs on 23.3.2025.
3. Subscribed to NHAI capital gains bond (approved under section 54EC) for ` 50 lakhs on 30-11-2024 and for ` 40 lakhs on 9-1-2025.

Compute the income chargeable under the head 'Capital Gains' of Mrs. Yuvika for A.Y.2025-26. The choice of exemption must be in the manner most beneficial to the assessee.

Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2005-06 – 117; F.Y. 2007-08 – 129; F.Y. 2024-25 - 363.

# 7.

Mr. Shiva purchased a house property on February 15, 1979 for ` 3,24,000. In addition, he has also paid stamp duty @10% on the stamp duty value of ` 3,50,000.

In April, 2008, Mr. Shiva entered into an agreement with Mr. Mohan for sale of such property for ` 14,35,000 and received an amount of ` 1,11,000 as advance. However, the sale consideration did not materialize and Mr. Shiva forfeited the advance. In May 2015, he again entered into an agreement for sale of said house for ` 20,25,000 to Ms. Deepshikha and received ` 1,51,000 as advance. However, as Ms. Deepshikha did not pay the balance amount, Mr. Shiva forfeited the advance. In August, 2015, Mr. Shiva constructed the first floor by incurring a cost of ` 3,90,000.

On November 15, 2024, Mr. Shiva entered into an agreement with Mr. Manish for sale of such house for ` 30,50,000 and received an amount of ` 1,50,000 as advance through an account payee cheque. Mr. Manish paid the balance entire sum and Mr. Shiva transferred the house to Mr. Manish on February 20, 2025. Mr. Shiva has paid the brokerage @1% of sale consideration to the broker.

On April 1, 2001, fair market value of the house property was ` 11,85,000 and Stamp duty value was ` 10,70,000. Further, the Valuation as per Stamp duty Authority of such house on 15ᵗʰ November, 2024 was ` 39,00,000 and on 20ᵗʰ February, 2025 was ` 41,00,000.

Compute the capital gains in the hands of Mr. Shiva for A.Y.2025-26. Also, compute the tax liability under section 112, assuming that the basic exemption limit has been fully exhausted against other income.

CII for F.Y. 2001-02: 100; F.Y. 2008-09: 137; F.Y. 2015-16: 254; F.Y. 2024-25: 363

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

# ANSWERS

# 1. Computation of total income & tax liability of Mr. Mithun for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|Long term capital gains on sale of original shares| |
|Gross sale consideration (100 x ` 4,000)|4,00,000|
|Less: Brokerage@1%|4,000|
|Net sale consideration|3,96,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition (100 x ` 2,000) (Refer Note 1)|2,00,000|
|Long term capital gains|1,96,000|
|Short term capital gains on sale of bonus shares| |
|Gross sale consideration (100 x ` 4,000)|4,00,000|
|Less: Brokerage@1%|4,000|
|Net sale consideration|3,96,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition of bonus shares [Nil as such shares are allotted after 1.04.2001]|NIL|
|Short term capital gains [Since bonus shares are held for less than 12 months before sale]|3,96,000|
|Income from other sources| |
|Dividend received from M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. is taxable in the hands of shareholders [200 shares x 10 per share]|2,000|
|Other income|8,00,000|
|Total Income|13,94,000|
|Tax Liability| |
|Tax on STCG u/s 11A| |
|20% of ` 3,96,000|79,200|
|Tax on LTCG u/s 112A| |
|12.5% of (` 1,96,000 - ` 1,25,000) since it is transferred on or after 23.7.2024|8,875|
|Tax on other income of ` 8,02,000| |
|` 3,00,000 to ` 7,00,000@5%|20,000|
|` 7,00,000 to ` 8,02,000 @10%|10,200|
| |30,200|
| |1,18,275|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.476 INCOME TAX LAW

Add: Health and education cess @4% 4,731

Tax liability 1,23,006

Tax liability (rounded off) 1,23,010

# Notes:

1. Cost of acquisition of such equity shares acquired before 1.2.2018 is higher of
- Cost of acquisition i.e., ` 1,000 per share and
- lower of
- Fair market value of such asset i.e., ` 2,000 per share and
- Full value of consideration i.e., ` 4,000 per share.

Therefore, the cost of acquisition of original share is ` 2,000 per share.
2. Securities transaction tax is not allowable as deduction.

2. Conversion of a capital asset into stock-in-trade is a transfer within the meaning of section 2(47) in the previous year in which the asset is so converted. However, the capital gains will be charged to tax only in the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold.

The cost inflation index of the financial year in which the conversion took place should be considered for computing indexed cost of acquisition. Further, the fair market value on the date of conversion would be deemed to be the full value of consideration for transfer of the asset as per section 45(2). The sale price less the fair market value on the date of conversion would be treated as the business income of the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold.

Therefore, in this problem, both capital gains and business income would be charged to tax in the A.Y. 2025-26.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits & Gains of Business or Profession| |
|Sale price of stock-in-trade|3,25,000|
|Less: Fair market value on the date of conversion|3,00,000|
|Capital Gains|25,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

|Full value of consideration (Fair market value on the date of conversion)|3,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (` 80,000 × 348/113)|2,46,372|
|Long-term capital gain|53,628|
|Taxable Income|78,628|

# 3. Computation of capital gains and business income of Harshita for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Business Income| |
|Sale price of flats [10 × ` 30 lakhs]|3,00,00,000|
|Less: Cost of flats| |
|Fair market value of land on the date of conversion|1,40,00,000|
|[` 210 lacs × 2/3]| |
|Cost of construction of flats [10 × ` 10 lakhs]|1,00,00,000|
|Business income chargeable to tax for A.Y.2025-26|60,00,000|
|Capital Gains| |
|Fair market value of land on the date of conversion deemed as the full value of consideration for the purposes of section 45(2)|2,10,00,000|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition [` 35,00,000 × 348/113]|1,07,78,761|
| |1,02,21,239|
|Proportionate capital gains arising during A.Y. 2025-26|68,14,159|
|[` 1,02,21,239 x 2/3]| |
|Less: Exemption under section 54EC|50,00,000|
|Capital gains chargeable to tax for A.Y.2025-26|18,14,159|

# Notes:

1. The conversion of a capital asset into stock-in-trade is treated as a transfer under section 2(47). It would be treated as a transfer in the year in which the capital asset is converted into stock-in-trade (i.e., P.Y.2023-24, in this case).
2. As per section 45(2), the capital gains arising from the transfer by way of conversion of capital assets into stock-in-trade will be chargeable to tax only in the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.478 INCOME TAX LAW

(3) The indexation benefit for computing indexed cost of acquisition would, however, be available only up to the year of conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade (i.e., P.Y.2023-24) and not up to the year of sale of stock-in-trade (i.e., P.Y.2024-25).

(4) For the purpose of computing capital gains in such cases, the fair market value of the capital asset on the date on which it was converted into stock-in-trade shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset. In this case, since only 2/3rd of the stock-in-trade (10 flats out of 15 flats) is sold in the P.Y.2024-25, only proportionate capital gains (i.e., 2/3rd) would be chargeable to tax in the A.Y.2025-26.

(5) On sale of such stock-in-trade, business income would arise. The business income chargeable to tax would be the difference between the price at which the stock-in-trade is sold and the fair market value on the date of conversion of the capital asset into stock-in-trade.

(6) In case of conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade and subsequent sale of stock-in-trade, the period of 6 months is to be reckoned from the date of sale of stock-in-trade for the purpose of exemption under section 54EC [CBDT Circular No.791 dated 2.6.2000]. In this case, since the investment in bonds of NHAI has been made within 6 months of sale of flats, the same qualifies for exemption under section 54EC. With respect to long-term capital gains arising on land or building or both in any financial year, the maximum deduction under section 54EC would be ` 50 lakhs, whether the investment in bonds of NHAI or RECL are made in the same financial year or next financial year or partly in the same financial year and partly in the next financial year. Therefore, even though investment of ` 50 lakhs has been made in bonds of NHAI during the P.Y. 2024-25 and investment of ` 50 lakhs has been made in bonds of RECL during the P.Y. 2025-26, both within the stipulated six month period, the maximum deduction allowable for A.Y. 2025-26, in respect of long-term capital gain arising on sale of long-term capital asset(s) during the P.Y. 2024-25, is only ` 50 lakhs.

# 4. (i) Compensation towards loss of stock:

Any compensation received from the insurance company towards loss/damage to stock in trade is
# CAPITAL GAINS

to be construed as a trading receipt. Hence, ` 4,80,000 received as insurance claim for loss of stock has to be assessed under the head “Profit and gains of business or profession”.

Note - The assessee can claim the value of stock destroyed by fire as revenue loss, eligible for deduction while computing income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# (ii) Compensation towards damage to machinery:

The question does not mention whether the salvaged machinery is taken over by the Insurance company or whether there was any replacement of machinery during the year. Assuming that the salvaged machinery is taken over by the Insurance company, and there was no fresh addition of machinery during the year, the block of machinery will cease to exist. Therefore, ` 4,80,000 being the excess of written down value (i.e. ` 10,80,000) over the insurance compensation (i.e. ` 6,00,000) will be assessable as a short-term capital loss.

Note – If new machinery is purchased in the next year, it will constitute the new block of machinery, on which depreciation can be claimed for that year.

# (iii) Compensation towards loss of gold chain and diamond ring:

Gold chain and diamond ring are capital assets as envisaged by section 2(14). They are not “personal effects”, which alone are to be excluded. If any profit or gain arises in a previous year owing to receipt of insurance claim, the same shall be chargeable to tax as capital gains. The capital gains has to be computed by reducing the cost of acquisition of jewellery from the insurance compensation of ` 1,80,000.

# 5. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” of Mr. Sarthak for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Capital Gains on sale of residential house| |
|Actual sale consideration|` 1,50,00,000|
|Value adopted by Stamp Valuation Authority on the date of agreement|` 1,70,00,000|

# 3.480 INCOME TAX LAW

[As per section 50C, where the actual sale consideration is less than the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority for the purpose of charging stamp duty, and such stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the actual sale consideration, then, the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority shall be taken to be the full value of consideration.

In a case where the date of agreement is different from the date of registration, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be considered provided the whole or part of the consideration is paid by way of account payee cheque/bank draft or by way of ECS through bank account or through such other electronic mode as may be prescribed, on or before the date of agreement.

In this case, since 20% of ` 150 lakhs is paid through account payee bank draft on the date of agreement, stamp duty value on the date of agreement would be considered for determining the full value of consideration]

|Full value of sale consideration|[Stamp duty value on the date of agreement, since it exceeds 110% of the actual sale consideration]|1,70,00,000| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| |Less: Cost of acquisition of residential house| |30,00,000| |
|Long-term capital gains [Since the residential house property was held by Mr. Sarthak for more than 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer]| |1,40,00,000| | |
|Less: Exemption u/s 54| |55,00,000| | |
|Since, long-term capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore, he would be eligible for exemption in respect of both the residential house properties purchased in India. The capital gain arising on transfer of a long-term residential property shall not be chargeable to tax to the extent such capital gain is invested in the purchase of these residential house properties in India within one year before or two years after the date of transfer of original asset. Thus, he would be eligible for exemption of ` 55,00,000 being ` 20,00,000 and ` 35,00,000 invested on acquisition of residential house property in Kanpur and Delhi, respectively.|Since, long-term capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore, he would be eligible for exemption in respect of both the residential house properties purchased in India. The capital gain arising on transfer of a long-term residential property shall not be chargeable to tax to the extent such capital gain is invested in the purchase of these residential house properties in India within one year before or two years after the date of transfer of original asset. Thus, he would be eligible for exemption of ` 55,00,000 being ` 20,00,000 and ` 35,00,000 invested on acquisition of residential house property in Kanpur and Delhi, respectively.| | | |
| |Long term capital gains chargeable to tax| |85,00,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CAPITAL GAINS

3.481

Note: It may be noted that since Sarthak has transferred residential house property on or after 23.7.2024 which was acquired before the said date, he can opt to pay tax @20% on LTCG (computed with indexation) or 12.5% on LTCG (computed without indexation) whichever is beneficial to him.

# 6. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” of Mrs. Yuvika for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|` (in lakhs)|` (in lakhs)|
|---|---|---|
|Capital Gains on sale of residential building| | |
|Actual sale consideration|810| |
|Value adopted by Stamp Valuation Authority|890| |

[Where the actual sale consideration is less than the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority for the purpose of charging stamp duty, and such stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the actual sale consideration, then, the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority shall be taken to be the full value of consideration as per section 50C. However, where the date of agreement is different from the date of registration, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be considered provided the whole or part of the consideration is received by way of account payee cheque/bank draft or by way of ECS through bank account or through prescribed electronic modes on or before the date of agreement. In this case, since advance of ` 80 lakh is received by RTGS, i.e., one of the prescribed modes, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be adopted as the full value of consideration. However, in the present case since stamp duty value on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of the actual consideration, actual sale consideration would be taken as the full value of consideration]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.482 INCOME TAX LAW

Gross Sale consideration (Actual consideration, since stamp duty value on the date of agreement does not exceed 110% of the actual consideration)

|Sale consideration|810.00|
|---|---|
|Less: Brokerage @1% of sale consideration (1% of ` 810 lakhs)|8.10|
|Net Sale consideration|801.90|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition| |
|- Cost of vacant land, ` 80 lakhs, plus registration and other expenses i.e., ` 8 lakhs, being 10% of cost of land [` 88 lakhs × 363/117]|273.03|
|- Construction cost of residential building (` 100 lakhs x 363/129)|281.40|
|Total|554.43|
|Long-term capital gains|247.47|

Since the residential house property was held by Mrs. Yuvika for more than 24 months immediately preceding the date of its transfer, the resultant gain is a long-term capital gain.

Less: Exemption under section 54

Where long-term capital gains exceed ` 2 crore, the capital gain arising on transfer of a long-term residential property shall not be chargeable to tax to the extent such capital gain is invested in the purchase of one residential house property in India, one year before or two years after the date of transfer of original asset.

Therefore, in the present case, the exemption would be available only in respect of the one residential house acquired in India and not in respect of the residential house in UK. It would be more beneficial for her to claim the cost of acquisition of residential house at Delhi, i.e., ` 130 lakhs as exemption.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# Computation of Capital gains in the hands of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Actual sale consideration|30,50,000| |
|Valuation as per Stamp duty Authority on the date of agreement|39,00,000| |

Less: Exemption under section 54EC 50.00

Amount invested in capital gains bonds of NHAI within six months after the date of transfer (i.e., on or before 13.1.2025), of long-term capital asset, being land or building or both, would qualify for exemption, to the maximum extent of ` 50 lakhs, whether such investment is made in the current financial year or subsequent financial year. Therefore, in the present case, exemption can be availed only to the extent of ` 50 lakh out of ` 90 lakhs, even if both the investments are made on or before 13.1.2025 (i.e., within six months after the date of transfer).

Long term capital gains chargeable to tax 67.47

Note: Advance of ` 20 lakhs received from Mr. Johar, would have been chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”, in the A.Y. 2016-17, as per section 56(2)(ix), since the same was forfeited on or after 01.4.2014 as a result of failure of negotiation. Hence, the same should not be deducted while computing indexed cost of acquisition.
# 3.484 INCOME TAX LAW

However, where the date of agreement is different from the date of registration, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be considered, provided the whole or part of the consideration is received by way of account payee cheque/bank draft or by way of ECS through bank account or such other electronic mode as may be prescribed on or before the date of agreement.

In the present case, since part of the payment is made by account payee cheque on the date of agreement, the stamp duty value on the date of agreement would be considered as full value of consideration.

|Deemed Full value of consideration [Since stamp duty value on the date of agreement exceeds 110% of the actual consideration, stamp duty value would be deemed as Full Value of Consideration]|39,00,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Expenses on transfer (Brokerage @1% of ` 30,50,000)|30,500|
|Net sale consideration|38,69,500|
|Less: Cost of acquisition (Note 1)|9,59,000|
|Less: Cost of improvement|3,90,000|
| |13,49,000|
|Long term capital gain|25,20,500|

# Computation of tax liability u/s 112

|Particulars|Amount (`)|
|---|---|
|On LTCG of ` 25,20,500 x 12.5%|3,15,063|
|Add: Health and Education cess @4%|12,603|
| |3,27,666|
|On LTCG with indexation benefit| |
|Net Sale consideration|38,69,500|
|Less: Indexed cost of acquisition|34,81,170|
|(` 9,59,000 x 363/100)| |

# CAPITAL GAINS

3.485

Less: Indexed cost of Improvement 5,57,362

[` 3,90,000 x 363/254]

Long-term capital loss (1,69,032)

Since the computation results in a long term capital loss, if indexation benefit is given, the tax u/s 112 would be Nil. However, this computation is only for determining tax liability, the said loss can neither be set-off nor carried forward.

# Notes:

1. # Computation of cost of acquisition

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Cost of acquisition,|10,70,000| |
|Being the higher of| | |
|(i) lower of Fair market value i.e.,|10,70,000| |
|    ` 11,85,000 and Stamp duty value| | |
|    i.e., ` 10,70,000, on April 1, 2001| | |
|(ii) Actual cost of acquisition|3,59,000| |
|    (` 3,24,000 + ` 35,000, being stamp| | |
|    duty @10% of ` 3,50,000)| | |
|Less: Advance money taken from| | |
|    Mr. Mohan and forfeited|1,11,000| |
|Cost of acquisition|9,59,000| |
2. Where advance money has been received by the assessee, and retained by him, as a result of failure of the negotiations, section 51 will apply. The advance retained by the assessee will go to reduce the cost of acquisition. Accordingly, cost of acquisition after reducing the advance money forfeited would be ` 9,59,000 [i.e. ` 10,70,000 – ` 1,11,000 (being the advance money forfeited during the P.Y. 2008-09)]. However, where the advance money is forfeited during the previous year 2014-15 or thereafter, the amount forfeited would be taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources” and such amount will not be deducted from the cost of acquisition of such asset while calculating capital gains. Hence, ` 1,51,000, being the advance received from Ms. Deepshikha and retained by him, would have been taxable under the head “Income from other sources” in the hands of Mr. Shiva in A.Y.2016-17.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.486 INCOME TAX LAW

# UNIT – 5 : INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to-

- identify the income, which are chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”;
- examine the transactions of receipt of money and property without consideration or for inadequate consideration to determine whether such receipts are chargeable to tax under this head;
- identify and comprehend the admissible deductions while computing income under this head;
- identify and comprehend the inadmissible deductions while computing income under this head;
- compute the tax on casual income by applying the rate of tax applicable on such income;
- compute the income chargeable to tax under this head.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

# Proforma for computation of “Income from Other Sources”

|Particulars|Amt|
|---|---|
|(i) Dividend Income|xxx|
|(ii) Casual Income (winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games, gambling, betting etc.)|xxx|
|(iii) Interest received on compensation/ enhanced compensation deemed to be income in the year of receipt [Section 56(2)(viii)]|xxx|
|(iv) Advance forfeited due to failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset [Section 56(2)(ix)]|xxx|
|(v) Sum of money or property received by any person [Section 56(2)(x)]|xxx|
|(vi) Compensation or other payment, due to or received by any person, in connection with termination of his employment or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto [Section 56(2)(xi)]|xxx|
|(vii) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xii)]|xxx|
|(viii) The following income, if not chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”| |
|(a) Any sum received by an employer from his employees as contributions to any provident fund, superannuation fund or any other fund for the welfare of the employees|xxx|
|(b) Interest on securities|xxx|
|(c) Income from letting out on hire of machinery, plant or furniture|xxx|
|(d) Where letting out of buildings is inseparable from the letting out of machinery, plant or furniture, the income from such letting|xxx|
|(e) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including bonus on such policy (if not chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries” also)|xxx|
|(ix) Any income chargeable to tax under the Act, but not falling under any other head of income|xxx|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.488 INCOME TAX LAW

(x) Deemed income u/s 59 – Remission or cessation of a trading liability or receipt of any amount in respect of loss or expenditure allowed as deduction in an earlier P.Y. xxx xxx a

# Less: Deductions allowable [Section 57]

|(a) In case of dividends [other than dividend referred u/s 2(22)(f)] or income in respect of units of a mutual fund or income in respect of units from a specified company|- interest expenditure allowable as deduction subject to a maximum of 20% of such income included in the total income for that year, without deduction under this section|
|---|---|
|(b) In case of interest on securities|- Any reasonable sum paid by way of commission or remuneration to a banker or any other person|
|(c) Income consists of recovery from employees as contribution to any PF, superannuation fund etc.|- Amount of contribution remitted before the due date under the respective Acts, in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1)(va)|
|(d) Income from letting on hire of machinery, plant and furniture, with or without building|- current repairs to the machinery, plant, furniture or building|
| |- insurance premium|
| |- depreciation/unabsorbed depreciation|
|(e) Family Pension – 33-1/3% of such income or ` 15,000 (in case of optional tax regime) or 25,000 (in case of default tax regime u/s 115BAC), whichever is less.| |
|(f) Interest on compensation/enhanced compensation received – 50% of such interest| |
|(g) Any other expenditure not in the nature of capital expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively for earning such income|xxx xxx|

Income from Other Sources xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.489

# Deductions not allowable [Section 58]

- (a) Any personal expense of the assessee.
- (b) Any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
- (c) Any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source therefrom.
- (d) 30% of sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible at source, if such tax has not been deducted or after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date of return specified in section 139(1).
- (e) Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV.
- (f) Any expenditure in respect of which a payment or aggregate payments exceeding ` 10,000 is made to a person in a day otherwise than by account payee cheque/bank draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay.

# Tax on Income from Other Sources

|Income|Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games, gambling, betting etc. (other than winning from any online game)|Unexplained cash credits/investments/money, bullion, jewellery etc./expenditure, etc.|Net winnings from online games|Other Income|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Section|Section 115BB|Section 115BBE|Section 115BBJ|-|
|Tax rate|30% of such winnings (further increased by surcharge)|60% of such income plus winnings (further increased by surcharge @25% of tax)|30% of such normal rates of tax| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.490 INCOME TAX LAW

# Tax on Income from Other Sources

applicable, and (Effective rate of surcharge, if tax is 78%, applicable, including health and education cess@4%)

- No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
- Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
- Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted against such income.
- Set-off of losses is not permissible against such income.

Section 58 specifies the deductions not allowable.

# 5.1 INTRODUCTION

Any income, profits or gains includible in the total income of an assessee, which cannot be included under any of the preceding heads of income, is chargeable under the head ‘Income from other sources’. Thus, this head is the residuary head of income and brings within its scope all the taxable income, profits or gains of an assessee which fall outside the scope of any other head. Therefore, when any income, profit or gain does not fall precisely under any of the other specific heads but is chargeable under the provisions of the Act, it would be charged under this head.

# 5.2 METHOD OF ACCOUNTING [SECTION 145]

Income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” has to be computed in accordance with the cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

# 5.3 INCOMES CHARGEABLE UNDER THIS HEAD

# [SECTION 56]

(i) The income chargeable only under the head ‘Income from other sources’

# (1) Dividend income [Section 56(2)(i)]

Dividend income is always taxable under the head “Income from other sources”. The term ‘dividend’ as used in the Act has a wider scope and meaning than under the general law.

# Deemed dividend [Sections 2(22)(a) to (f)]:

According to section 2(22), the following receipts are deemed to be dividend:

1. (a) Distribution of accumulated profits, entailing the release of company’s assets - Any distribution of accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, by a company to its shareholders is dividend if it entails the release of all or any part of its assets.

Note: If accumulated profits are distributed in cash, it is dividend in the hands of the shareholders. Where accumulated profits are distributed in kind, for example by delivery of shares etc. entailing the release of company’s assets, the market value of such shares on the date of such distribution is deemed as dividend in the hands of the shareholder.
2. (b) Distribution of debentures, deposit certificates to shareholders and bonus shares to preference shareholders - Any distribution to its shareholders by a company of debentures, debenture stock or deposit certificate in any form, whether with or without interest, and any distribution of bonus shares to preference shareholders to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, will be deemed as dividend.

The market value of such bonus shares is deemed as dividend in the hands of the preference shareholder. In the case of debentures, debenture stock etc., their value is to be taken at the market rate and if there is no market rate they should be valued according to accepted principles of valuation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.492 INCOME TAX LAW

Note: Bonus shares given to equity shareholders are not treated as dividend.

(c) Distribution on liquidation - Any distribution made to the shareholders of a company on its liquidation, to the extent to which the distribution is attributable to the accumulated profits of the company immediately before its liquidation, whether capitalised or not, is deemed to be dividend income.

Note: Any distribution made out of the profits of the company after the date of the liquidation cannot amount to dividend. It is a repayment towards capital.

(d) Distribution on reduction of capital - Any distribution to its shareholders by a company on the reduction of its capital to the extent to which the company possessed accumulated profits, whether capitalised or not, shall be deemed to be dividend.

(e) Advance or loan by a closely held company to its shareholder - Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to any shareholder who is the beneficial owner of 10% or more of the equity capital of the company will be deemed to be dividend to the extent of the accumulated profits. If the loan is not covered by the accumulated profits, it is not deemed to be dividend.

Advance or loan by a closely held company to a specified concern - Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially interested, to any concern (i.e. HUF/Firm/AOP/BOI/Company) in which a shareholder, having the beneficial ownership of at least 10% of the equity shares is a member or a partner and in which he has a substantial interest (i.e. at least 20% share of the income of the concern) will be deemed to be dividend.

Also, any payments by such a closely held company on behalf of, or for the individual benefit of any such shareholder will also be deemed to be dividend. However, in both cases the ceiling limit of dividend is to the extent of accumulated profits.

Exceptions: The following payments or loan given would not be deemed as dividend:

(i) Loan granted in the ordinary course of business - If the loan
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.493

is granted in the ordinary course of its business and lending of money is a substantial part of the company’s business, the loan or advance to a shareholder or to the specified concern is not deemed to be dividend.

(ii) Dividend paid is set off against the deemed dividend - Where a loan had been treated as dividend and subsequently, the company declares and distributes dividend to all its shareholders including the borrowing shareholder, and the dividend so paid is set off by the company against the previous borrowing, the adjusted amount will not be again treated as a dividend.

Note: Subsequent repayment of loan or charge of interest at market rate does not make any difference in the applicability of section 2(22)(e).

(f) Amount received by shareholder on buy-back of shares by domestic companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) before 1.10.2024 by a domestic company, additional income-tax @20% (plus surcharge @12% and cess @4%) is leviable in the hands of the company¹. Consequently, the income arising to the shareholders in respect of such buyback of shares by the domestic company is exempt under section 10(34A).

However, in case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) on or after 1.10.2024 by a domestic company, any sum paid by the domestic company for purchase of its own shares would be deemed as dividend in the hands of shareholders and shall be charged to income-tax at applicable tax rates. No deduction for expenses would be available against such dividend income while determining the income from other sources.

Below here is the example to understand the provisions of section 46A and section 2(22)(f):

|No. of shares of A Ltd. bought in 2020 By Mr. B @ ` 40 per share|100 shares|
|---|---|
|Total cost of acquisition|` 4,000 (100 x ` 40)|
|No. of shares bought back in November 2024 by A Ltd.|20 shares @ ` 60 per share|

¹Under section 115QA

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.494 INCOME TAX LAW

Income taxable as deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(f) [` 60 ` 1,200 per share x 20 shares]

Long-term capital loss on such buyback as per section ` 800 a 46A (Value of consideration - COA) (Nil - ` 40 x 20)

[Such LTCL can be set-off against other LTCG or it can be carried forward to the next year for set-off against other LTCG]

No. of shares sold in December 2025 by Mr. B @` 70 per share 50 Shares

Long-term capital Gain (` 70 x 50 – ` 40 x 50) ` 1,500

Chargeable long-term capital gain in P.Y. 2025-26 after set-off of long-term capital loss [` 1,500 – ` 800] would be ` 700

# Exceptions:

The following do not constitute “dividend” –

1. Distribution in respect of non-participating shares issued for full cash consideration – Any distribution made in accordance with (c) or (d) in respect of any share issued for full cash consideration and the holder of such share is not entitled to participate in the surplus asset in the event of liquidation.
2. Payment on buy back of shares – Any payment made by a company on purchase of its own shares upto 30th September, 2024, from a shareholder in accordance with the provisions of section 77A of the Companies Act, 1956²;
3. Distribution of shares to the shareholders on demerger by the resulting company - Any distribution of shares on demerger by the resulting companies to the shareholders of the demerged company (whether or not there is a reduction of capital in the demerged company).

# Meaning of “accumulated profits”

Accumulated profits in point (a), (b), (d) and (e) above include all profits of the company up to the date of distribution or payment of dividend. Accumulated profits in point (c) include all profits of the company up to the date of liquidation whether capitalised or not.

² Now section 58 of the Companies Act, 2013

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.495

In the case of an amalgamated company, the accumulated profits, whether capitalized or not, of the amalgamating company on the date of amalgamation shall be included in the accumulated profits, whether capitalized or not or loss, as the case may be, of the amalgamated company.

Clarification regarding trade advance not to be treated as deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e) – [Circular No. 19/2017, dated 12.06.2017]

Section 2(22)(e) provides that "dividend" includes any payment by a company in which public are not substantially interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to a shareholder who is the beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power, or to any concern in which such shareholder is a member or a partner and in which he has a substantial interest or any payment by any such company on behalf, or for the individual benefit, of any such shareholder, to the extent to which the company in either case possesses accumulated profits.

The CBDT observed that some Courts in the recent past have held that trade advances in the nature of commercial transactions would not fall within the ambit of the provisions of section 2(22)(e) and such views have attained finality.

In view of the above, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that it is a settled position that trade advances, which are in the nature of commercial transactions, would not fall within the ambit of the word 'advance' in section 2(22)(e) and therefore, the same would not to be treated as deemed dividend.

# Basis of charge of dividend [Section 8]

Dividend declared or distributed or paid by a company is deemed to be the income of the shareholder in the previous year in which it is so declared or distributed or paid, as the case may be.

Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) – Distribution by a company which is deemed as dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) would be the income of the previous year in which it is so distributed.

Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(e) – Payment of advance or loan to a shareholder or a concern, as the case may be, which is deemed as dividend u/s 2(22)(e) will be the income of the previous year in which it is so paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.496 INCOME TAX LAW

Interim dividend – Interim dividend would be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which such dividend is unconditionally made available by the company to the members who are entitled to it.

Tax rate on dividend income - Any income by way of dividends received by a resident from a company, whether domestic or foreign, is taxable in the hands of a resident shareholder at normal rates of tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Rahul, a resident Indian, holding 28% of equity shares in a company, took a loan of ₹ 5,00,000 from the same company. On the date of granting the loan, the company had accumulated profit of ₹ 4,00,000. The company is engaged in some manufacturing activity.

1. Is the amount of loan taxable as deemed dividend, if the company is a company in which the public are substantially interested?
2. What would be your answer, if the lending company is a private limited company (i.e. which is not a company in which the public are substantially interested)?

# SOLUTION

Any payment by a company, other than a company in which the public are substantially interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to an equity shareholder, being a person who is the beneficial owner of shares holding not less than 10% of the voting power, is deemed as dividend under section 2(22)(e), to the extent the company possesses accumulated profits.

1. The provisions of section 2(22)(e), however, will not apply where the loan is given by a company in which public are substantially interested. In such a case, the loan would not be taxable as deemed dividend.
2. However, if the loan is taken from a private company (i.e., a company in which the public are not substantially interested), which is not a company where lending of money is a substantial part of the business of the company, the provisions of section 2(22)(e) would be attracted. In this case, since the company is a manufacturing company and not a lending company and Rahul holds more than 10% of the equity shares in the company, the provisions of section 2(22)(e) would be attracted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.497

The amount chargeable as deemed dividend cannot, however, exceed the accumulated profits held by the company on the date of giving the loan. Therefore, the amount taxable as deemed dividend would be limited to the accumulated profit i.e., ` 4,00,000 and not the amount of loan which is ` 5,00,000.

# (2) Casual Income [Section 56(2)(ib)]

Casual income means income in the nature of winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort, gambling, betting etc. Casual income is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources”.

# (3) Interest received on compensation/ enhanced compensation deemed to be income in the year of receipt and taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources” [Sections 56(2)(viii)]

(i) As per section 145(1), income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”, shall be computed in accordance with either cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee.

(ii) Section 145B(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in section 145(1), the interest received by an assessee on compensation or on enhanced compensation shall be deemed to be his income for the year in which it is received, irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee.

(iii) Section 56(2)(viii) provides that income by way of interest received on compensation or on enhanced compensation referred to in section 145B(1) shall be assessed as “Income from other sources” in the year in which it is received.

# (4) Advance forfeited due to failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset to be taxable as “Income from other sources” [Section 56(2)(ix)]

(i) Prior to A.Y. 2015-16, any advance retained or received in respect of a negotiation for transfer which failed to materialise is reduced from the cost of acquisition of the asset or the written down value or the fair
# 3.498 INCOME TAX LAW

market value of the asset, at the time of its transfer to compute the capital gains arising therefrom as per section 51. In case the asset transferred is a long-term capital asset, indexation benefit would be on the cost so reduced.

1. With effect from A.Y. 2015-16, section 56(2)(ix) provides for the taxability of any sum of money, received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset. Such sum shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Income from other sources’, if such sum is forfeited and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset.
2. In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and retained, section 51 was amended to provide that where any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset, has been included in the total income of the assessee for any previous year, in accordance with section 56(2)(ix), such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for which the asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair market value, as the case may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.
3. It may be noted that advance received and forfeited upto 31.3.2014 has to be reduced from cost of acquisition while computing capital gains, since such advance would not have been subject to tax under section 56(2)(ix). Only the advance received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014 would be subject to tax under section 56(2)(ix). Hence, such advance would not be reduced from the cost of acquisition for computing capital gains.

# (5) Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for inadequate consideration to be subject to tax in the hands of the recipient [Section 56(2)(x)]

1. In order to prevent the practice of receiving sum of money or the property without consideration or for inadequate consideration, section 56(2)(x) brings to tax any sum of money or the value of any property received by any person without consideration or the value of any property received for inadequate consideration.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.499

# (ii) Sum of Money:

If any sum of money is received without consideration and the aggregate value of which exceeds ` 50,000, the whole of the aggregate value of such sum is chargeable to tax.

# (iii) Immovable property [Land or building or both]:

# I. If an immovable property is received -

- (a) Without consideration: The stamp duty value of such property would be taxed as the income of the recipient if it exceeds ` 50,000.
- (b) For Inadequate consideration: If consideration is less than the stamp duty value of the property and the difference between the stamp duty value and consideration is more than the higher of –

1. ` 50,000
2. 10% of consideration

The difference between the stamp duty value and the consideration shall be chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee as “Income from other sources”.

# II. Value to be considered where the date of agreement is different from date of registration:

Taking into consideration the possible time gap between the date of agreement and the date of registration, the stamp duty value may be taken as on the date of agreement instead of the date of registration, if the date of the agreement fixing the amount of consideration for the transfer of the immovable property and the date of registration are not the same, provided whole or part of the consideration has been paid by way of an account payee cheque or an account payee bank draft or by use of electronic clearing system (ECS) through a bank account or through such prescribed electronic mode on or before the date of agreement.

The prescribed electronic modes notified are credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat).
# 3.500 INCOME TAX LAW

Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay as other electronic modes of payment [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].

# III.

If the stamp duty value of immovable property is disputed by the assessee, the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of such property to a Valuation Officer. If such value is less than the stamp duty value, the same would be taken for determining the value of such property, for computation of income under this head in the hands of the buyer.

# (iv) Movable Property [Property, other than immovable property]:

If movable property is received -

- (a) Without consideration: The aggregate fair market value of such property on the date of receipt would be taxed as the income of the recipient, if it exceeds ` 50,000.
- (b) For inadequate consideration: If the difference between the aggregate fair market value and such consideration exceeds ` 50,000, such difference would be taxed as the income of the recipient.

# (v) Applicability of section 56(2)(x):

The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would apply only to property which is the nature of a capital asset of the recipient and not stock-in-trade, raw material or consumable stores of any business of the recipient. Therefore, only transfer of a capital asset, without consideration or for inadequate consideration would attract the provisions of section 56(2)(x).

# (vi) The table below summarizes the scheme of taxability of gifts –

|Nature of asset|Taxable value|
|---|---|
|1 Money|The whole amount if the same exceeds ` 50,000.|
|2 Movable property|(i) Without consideration: The aggregate fair market value of the property, if it exceeds ` 50,000.|
| |(ii) Inadequate consideration: The difference between the aggregate fair market value and the consideration, if such difference exceeds ` 50,000.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.501

# 3 Immovable property

(i) Without consideration:

The stamp value of the property, if it exceeds ` 50,000.

(ii) Inadequate consideration:

The difference between the stamp duty value and the consideration, if such difference is more than the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of consideration.

# (vii) Non-applicability of section 56(2)(x):

However, any sum of money or value of property received, in the following circumstances would be outside the ambit of section 56(2)(x) -

- (a) from any relative; or
- (b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
- (c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
- (d) in contemplation of death of the payer or donor, as the case may be; or
- (e) from any local authority3; or
- (f) from any fund or foundation or university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or institution4; or
- (g) from or by any trust or institution registered5; or
- (h) by any fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution6.
- (i) by way of transaction not regarded as transfer7 under section 47(i)/(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(vib)/(vid)/(vii).
- (j) from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the benefit of relative of the individual.

3 as defined in the Explanation to section 10(20)

4 referred to in section 10(23C)

5 under section 12AA or section 12AB

6 referred to in section 10(23C)(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(via)

7 under section 47(via)/(viaa)/(vic)/(vica)/(vicb)/(viiac)/(viiad)/(viiae)/(viiaf)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.502 INCOME TAX LAW

(k) from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.

(l) by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19 subject to conditions notified by the Central Government. Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 91/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified that for such purpose, the individual has to keep a record of the following documents, namely:-

- (a) the COVID-19 positive report of the individual or his family member, or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive through investigations in a hospital or an in-patient facility by a treating physician for a person so admitted;
- (b) all necessary documents of medical diagnosis or treatment of the individual or family member due to COVID-19 or illness related to COVID-19 suffered within 6 months from the date of being determined as a COVID-19 positive;

The details of the amount so received in any financial year has to be furnished in the prescribed form to the Income-tax Department within 9 months from the end of such financial year.

(m) by a member of the family of a deceased person -

- (A) from the employer of the deceased person (without any limit); or
- (B) from any other person or persons to the extent that such sum or aggregate of such sums ≤ ` 10 lakhs, where the cause of death of such person is illness related to COVID-19 and the payment is—

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.503

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 92/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified the following conditions -

1. (i) the death of the individual should be within 6 months from the date of testing positive or from the date of being clinically determined as a COVID-19 case, for which any sum of money has been received by the member of the family;

(ii) the family member of the individual has to keep a record of the following documents,

- (a) the COVID-19 positive report of the individual, or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive through investigations in a hospital or an inpatient facility by a treating physician;
- (b) a medical report or death certificate issued by a medical practitioner or a Government civil registration office, in which it is stated that death of the person is related to corona virus disease (COVID-19).
2. The details of such amount received in any financial year has to be furnished in the prescribed form to the Assessing Officer within 9 months from the end of such financial year.

# (viii) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Property|A capital asset of the assessee, namely,-|
| |(a) immovable property being land or building or both,|
| |(b) shares and securities,|
| |(c) jewellery,|
| |(d) archaeological collections,|
| |(e) drawings,|
| |(f) paintings,|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.504 INCOME TAX LAW

(g) sculptures,

(h) any work of art or

(i) bullion.

It also includes virtual digital asset8.

# Relative

(a) In case of an individual –

- (i) spouse of the individual;
- (ii) brother or sister of the individual;
- (iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
- (iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the individual;
- (v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
- (vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
- (vii) spouse of any of the persons referred in (i) to (vi) above.

(b) In case of Hindu Undivided Family, any member thereof.

# Family

For the purpose of (l) and (m) in page 3.498, family in relation to an individual means

- (i) the spouse and children of the individual; and
- (ii) the parents, brothers and sisters of the individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependent on the individual.

8 The provisions relating to Virtual digital asset will be dealt with at Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.505

50 lakhs? whichever is earlier.

deductible at the Tax @1% of the time of credit or

Is the consideration for transfer of

higher is payment, -

u/s 194 Land and Building other than

taxable u/s 56(2)(x), if such

less than No

Stamp Duty Value

difference is more than the higher of agricultural land

% of consideration and SDV

Tax is to be

# In the hands of the buyer

Tax/TDS implications on transfer of immovable property for inadequate consideration

L & B Yes deducted No t 10 – will be 50,000 and SDV

SDV on the date registration considered would be

Is the date of agreement different from the registration? No No

consideration paid by way of A/c payee Cheque/ Bank Draft/ECS

SDV on the date of agreement may be

Is whole or part of the Yes date of agreement? considered

Yes Yes

electronic mode agreement may be taken as such SDV

date SDV on the date of the full value of consideration

% of consideration, if exceeds 110

If L & B are held as Capital Asset Section 50C will apply

# In the hands of the seller

Section 50C will Yes

different from the date of registration? Is date of agreement

consideration received by way of A/c payee cheque/ Bank Draft or ECS

Bank A/c mode on

Section 43CA will apply No

If L & B are held as trade stock -

% registration may be SDV on the date of

110 consideration, if taken as the full value of the actual SDV exceeds
# 3.506 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. A, a dealer in shares, received the following without consideration during the P.Y. 2024-25 from his friend Mr. B:

1. Cash gift of ` 75,000 on his anniversary, 15th April, 2024.
2. Bullion, the fair market value of which was ` 60,000, on his birthday, 19th June, 2024.
3. A plot of land at Faridabad on 1st July, 2024, the stamp value of which is ` 5 lakh on that date. Mr. B had purchased the land in April, 2009.

Mr. A purchased from his friend Mr. C, who is also a dealer in shares, 1000 shares of X Ltd. @ ` 400 each on 19th June, 2023, the fair market value of which was ` 600 each on that date. Mr. A sold these shares in the course of his business on 23rd June, 2024.

Further, on 1st November, 2024, Mr. A took possession of property (office building) booked by him two years back at ` 20 lakh. The stamp duty value of the property as on 1st November, 2024 was ` 32 lakh and on the date of booking was ` 23 lakh. He had paid ` 1 lakh by account payee cheque as down payment on the date of booking.

On 1st March, 2025, he sold the plot of land at Faridabad for ` 7 lakh.

Compute the income of Mr. A chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” and “Capital Gains” for A.Y. 2025-26.

# SOLUTION

Computation of “Income from other sources” of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(1) Cash gift is taxable under section 56(2)(x), since it exceeds|75,000|
|(2) Since bullion is included in the definition of property, therefore, when bullion is received without consideration, the same is taxable, since the aggregate fair market value exceeds|60,000|
|(3) Stamp value of plot of land at Faridabad, received without consideration, is taxable under section 56(2)(x)|5,00,000|
|(4) Difference of ` 2 lakh in the value of shares of X Ltd. purchased from Mr. C, a dealer in shares, is not taxable as it represents the stock-in-trade of Mr. A. Since Mr. A is a dealer in shares and it has been mentioned that the shares were|-|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.507 subsequently sold in the course of his business, such shares represent the stock-in-trade of Mr. A.

(5) Difference between the stamp duty value of ` 23 lakh on the date of booking and the actual consideration of ` 20 lakh paid is taxable under section 56(2)(x) since the difference exceeds ` 2,00,000, being the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of 3,00,000 consideration

# Income from Other Sources

9,35,000

# Computation of “Capital Gains” of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Sale Consideration|7,00,000|
|Less: Cost of acquisition [deemed to be the stamp value charged to tax under section 56(2)(x) as per section 49(4)]|5,00,000|
|Short-term capital gains|2,00,000|

Note – The resultant capital gains will be short-term capital gains since for calculating the period of holding, the period of holding of previous owner is not to be considered.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Discuss the taxability or otherwise of the following in the hands of the recipient under section 56(2)(x) the Income-tax Act, 1961 -

1. Akhil HUF received ` 75,000 in cash from niece of Akhil (i.e., daughter of Akhil’s sister). Akhil is the Karta of the HUF.
2. Nitisha, a member of her father’s HUF, transferred a house property to the HUF without consideration. The stamp duty value of the house property is ` 9,00,000.
3. Mr. Akshat received 100 shares of A Ltd. from his friend as a gift on occasion of his 25ᵗʰ marriage anniversary. The fair market value on that date was ` 100 per share. He also received jewellery worth ` 45,000 (FMV) from his nephew on the same day.
4. Kishan HUF gifted a car to son of Karta for achieving good marks in XII board examination. The fair market value of the car is ` 5,25,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.508 INCOME TAX LAW SOLUTION

|Taxable/Non-taxable|Amount|Reason|
|---|---|---|
|Taxable|75,000|Sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 received without consideration from a non-relative is taxable under section 56(2)(x). Daughter of Mr. Akhil’s sister is not a relative of Akhil HUF, since she is not a member of Akhil HUF.|
|Non-taxable|Nil|Immovable property received without consideration by a HUF from its relative is not taxable under section 56(2)(x). Since Nitisha is a member of the HUF, she is a relative of the HUF. However, income from such asset would be included in the hands of Nitisha under 64(2).|
|Taxable|55,000|As per provisions of section 56(2)(x), in case the aggregate fair market value of property, other than immovable property, received without consideration exceeds ` 50,000, the whole of the aggregate value shall be taxable. In this case, the aggregate fair market value of shares (` 10,000) and jewellery (` 45,000) exceeds ` 50,000. Hence, the entire amount of ` 55,000 shall be taxable.|
|Non-taxable|Nil|Car is not included in the definition of property for the purpose of section 56(2)(x), therefore, the same shall not be taxable.|

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. Hari, a property dealer, sold a building in the course of his business to his friend Mr. Rajesh, who is a dealer in automobile spare parts, for ` 90 lakh on 1.1.2025 when the stamp duty value was ` 150 lakh. The agreement was, however, entered into on 1.9.2024 when the stamp duty value was ` 140 lakh. Mr. Hari had received a down payment of ` 15 lakh by a crossed cheque from Rajesh on the date of agreement. Discuss the tax implications in the hands of Hari and Rajesh, assuming that Mr. Hari has purchased the building for ` 75 lakh on 12ᵗʰ July, 2023. Would your answer be different if Hari was a share broker instead of a property dealer?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.509

# Case 1: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a property dealer

In the hands of the seller, Mr. Hari

In the hands of the buyer, Mr. Rajesh

In the hands of Hari, the provisions of section 43CA would be attracted, since the building represents his stock-in-trade and he has transferred the same for a consideration less than the stamp duty value; and the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of consideration.

Under section 43CA, the option to adopt the stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be exercised only if whole or part of the consideration has been received on or before the date of agreement by way of account payee cheque or draft or by use of ECS through a bank account or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay on or before the date of agreement.

In this case, since the down payment of ₹ 15 lakh is received on the date of agreement by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque, the option cannot be exercised.

Therefore, ₹ 75 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value on the date of transfer i.e., ₹ 150 lakh, and the purchase price i.e., ₹ 75 lakh, would be chargeable as business income in the hands of Mr. Hari, since stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the consideration.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.510 INCOME TAX LAW

# Case 2: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a share broker

In the hands of the seller, Mr. Hari

In the hands of the buyer, Mr. Rajesh

In case Mr. Hari is a share broker and not a property dealer, the building would represent his capital asset and not stock-in-trade. In such a case, the provisions of section 50C would be attracted in the hands of Mr. Hari, since building is transferred for a consideration less than the stamp duty value; and the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of consideration. Thus, ` 75 lakh, being the difference between the stamp duty value on the date of registration (i.e., ` 150 lakh) and the purchase price (i.e., ` 75 lakh) would be chargeable as short-term capital gains.

It may be noted that under section 50C, the option to adopt the stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be exercised only if whole or part of the consideration has been received on or before the date of agreement by way of account payee cheque or draft or by use of ECS through a bank account or through credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay on or before the date of agreement. In this case, since the down payment of ` 15 lakhs has been received on the date of agreement by crossed cheque and not account payee cheque, the option cannot be exercised.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.511

# (6) Compensation or any other payment received in connection with termination of his employment [Section 56(2)(xi)]

Any compensation or any other payment, due to or received by any person, by whatever name called, in connection with the termination of his employment or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto shall be chargeable to tax under this head.

# (7) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xii)]

Any sum received under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy would not be included in the total income of a person [Section 10(10D)].

The following table summarizes the exemption available under section 10(10D) vis-a-vis the date of issue of such policies and the corresponding condition to be satisfied for exemption -

|Exemption u/s 10(10D)|In respect of|Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt.|
|---|---|---|
|Policies issued before 1.4.2003| | |
|Policies issued between 1.4.2003 and 31.3.2012|However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 20% of “actual capital sum assured”.| |
|Policies issued on or after 1.4.2012 but before 1.4.2013|However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% of actual capital sum assured.| |
|Policies issued on or after 1.4.2013|(a) Where the insurance is on the life of a person with disability or severe disability as referred to in section 80U or a person suffering from disease or ailment as specified under section 80DDB.|Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However,|

# 3.512 INCOME TAX LAW

Exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 15% of “actual capital sum assured”.

(b) Where the insurance is on the life of any person, other than mentioned in (a) above, any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% of “actual capital sum assured”.

In respect of any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However, exemption would not be available if the premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy exceeds 10% or 15%, as the case may be, of “actual capital sum assured”. Further, exemption would also not be available if the amount of premium payable exceeds ₹ 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such policy.

In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one LIP (other than ULIP) and the aggregate of premium payable on such policies exceed ₹ 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such policy(ies), exemption would be available in respect of any of those LIPs (other than ULIP), at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ₹ 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during their term.

Any sum received on the death of a person is exempt irrespective of the annual premium payable on the policy. The condition of payment of premium of 10% or 15% or 20% or ₹ 5,00,000 would not be applicable.

Exemption is not available in respect of amount received from an insurance policy taken for disabled person under section 80DD: Any sum received under section 80DD(3) shall not be exempt under section 10(10D). Accordingly, if the dependent disabled, in respect of whom an
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.513 individual or the member of the HUF has paid or deposited any amount in any scheme of LIC or any other insurer, predeceases the individual or the member of the HUF, the amount so paid or deposited shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the previous year in which such amount is received. Such amount would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

Exemption is not available in respect of the sum received under a Keyman insurance policy: Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy shall also not be exempt.

Explanation 1 to section 10(10D) defines “Keyman insurance policy” as a life insurance policy taken by one person on the life of another person who is or was the employee of the first-mentioned person or is or was connected in any manner whatsoever with the business of the first-mentioned person. The term includes within its scope a keyman insurance policy which has been assigned to any person during its term, with or without consideration. Therefore, such policies shall continue to be treated as a keyman insurance policy even after the same is assigned to the keyman. Consequently, the sum received by the keyman on such policies, being “keyman insurance policies”, would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

Guidelines u/s 10(10D) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 [Circular No. 15/2023 dated 16.08.2023]

Section 10(10D) provides for exemption of the sum received under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such a policy subject to the condition that the annual premium does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

W.e.f. A.Y. 2024-25, section 10(10D) amended by the Finance Act, 2023 to provide that -

1. In case where an assessee has a single life insurance policy (other than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - Exemption u/s 10(10D) would not be available with respect to any life insurance policy (other than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023, if the amount of premium payable exceeds ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of such life insurance policy.
2. In case where an assessee has multiple life insurance policies (other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - In a case where
# 3.514 INCOME TAX LAW

premium is payable by a person for more than one life insurance policies (other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 and the aggregate of premium payable on such life insurance policies exceed a ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such LIP(s), exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of those LIPs, at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during their term. However, to get exemption u/s 10(10D), the condition of annual premium not exceeding 10% of the actual capital sum assured also needs to be satisfied.

# (III) Exemption in case of death of a person

In case any sum is received on the death of a person, exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available irrespective of the annual premium payable of the LIP.

Guidelines issued by the CBDT: In case any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this clause, the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty with the previous approval of the Central Government.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, with the approval of the Central Government, vide this circular, issued the following guidelines in respect of LIPs (other than ULIPs)–

# Situation 1:

No sum of any nature including bonus (such sum hereinafter referred as “consideration”) is received by the assessee on any LIPs which are issued on or after 1.4.2023 (such LIPs hereinafter referred as “eligible LIPs”) during any previous year preceding the current previous year (being the P.Y. in which consideration is received and its taxability is being examined) or consideration has been received on such eligible LIPs in an earlier previous year but has not been claimed exempt. In such a situation, the exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:

|Circumstance|Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D)|
|---|---|
|If the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP does not exceed ` 5,00,000|Such consideration would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).|

# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP and annual premium does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

If the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP.

# Example 1:

|LIP|A|
|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2013|
|Annual premium|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|60,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2023 on maturity|70,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2024-25.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2025-26 since annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable is not applicable, since it is not an eligible LIP.

# Example 2:

|LIP|A|
|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|5,00,000|
|Sum assured|50,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|52,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
# 3.516 INCOME TAX LAW

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since the annual premium payable on the policy does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

# Example 3:

|LIP|A|
|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|60,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|70,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 since the annual premium payable on the eligible LIP exceeds ` 5,00,000.

# II. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP

|Circumstance|Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D)|
|---|---|
|If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs and the annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured|Such consideration would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D). [Refer Example 4 given below]|
|If the aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP|Consideration in respect of any of those eligible LIPs whose aggregate amount of premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during their term would be eligible for exemption|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.517 u/s 10(10D), provided their annual premium ≤ 10% of actual capital sum assured.

[Refer Examples 5, 6 and 7 given below]

# Example 4:

|LIP|A|B|
|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|3,00,000|2,00,000|
|Sum assured|30,00,000|20,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|32,00,000|21,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” does not exceed ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.

Further, annual premium payable in respect of LIP “A” and LIP “B” does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Therefore, the consideration received under LIP “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

# Example 5:

|LIP|A|B|
|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|4,50,000|5,50,000|
|Sum assured|45,00,000|55,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|52,00,000|60,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
# 3.518 INCOME TAX LAW

However, the consideration received under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since its annual premium payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of the policy and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “B” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

# Example 6:

|LIP|A|B|C|
|---|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|1,00,000|3,50,000|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|10,00,000|35,00,000|60,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|12,00,000|40,00,000|70,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies. However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

# Example 7:

|LIP|X|A|B|C|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2022|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|
|Annual premium|5,50,000|1,00,000|3,50,000|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|55,00,000|10,00,000|35,00,000|60,00,000|

# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.519

|Consideration|62,00,000|received as on 01.11.2032 on maturity| |
|---|---|---|---|
|Consideration|12,00,000|40,00,000|70,00,000|
|received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity| | | |

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34, except LIP X in P.Y. 2032-33.

# Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D)

The consideration received under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit of ` 5,00,000 on amount of premium payable is not applicable, since LIP “X” is not an eligible LIP.

The aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” (being LIPs issued on or after 1.4.2023) exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.

However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.

# Situation 2:

Consideration has been received by the assessee under any one or more eligible LIPs (i.e., issued on or after 1.4.2023) during any P.Y. preceding the current P.Y. and it has been claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D). Such eligible LIPs are referred as “Earlier Exempt Eligible LIPs (EEE LIPs)” in this paragraph and corresponding examples and reference to eligible LIPs shall not include EEE LIPs. The exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.520 INCOME TAX LAW

# I. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under one eligible LIP only

|Circumstance|Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D)|
|---|---|
|If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP and annual premium in respect of eligible LIP does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.|Consideration under such eligible LIP would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).|
|If aggregate amount of premium payable on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIP|Consideration under such eligible LIP would not be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).|

# II. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP

|Circumstance|Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D)|
|---|---|
|If aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs and EEE LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs and annual premium in respect of eligible LIPs also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.|Consideration received would be eligible for exemption under u/s 10(10D).|
|If aggregate of the amount of premium payable on such eligible LIPs and EEE LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the term of such eligible LIPs|Consideration in respect of any of those eligible LIPs (whose aggregate amount of premium along with the aggregate amount of premium of EEE LIPs does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during their term) would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).|

[Refer Examples 8, 9 and 10 given below]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

# Example 8:

|LIP|X|A|B|C|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|
|Annual premium|4,50,000|1,00,000|1,50,000|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|45,00,000|10,00,000|15,00,000|60,00,000|
|Consideration received|50,00,000 as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|50,00,000 as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|50,00,000 as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|50,00,000 as on 01.11.2033 on maturity|
|Consideration received|12,00,000 18,00,000 70,00,000 as on 01.11.2034 on maturity|12,00,000 18,00,000 70,00,000 as on 01.11.2034 on maturity|12,00,000 18,00,000 70,00,000 as on 01.11.2034 on maturity|12,00,000 18,00,000 70,00,000 as on 01.11.2034 on maturity|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except LIP X in P.Y. 2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.

The aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and the premium for LIP “X” also exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.

Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36.

# Example 9:

|LIP|X|A|B|C|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|
|Annual premium|2,50,000|2,00,000|2,50,000|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|25,00,000|20,00,000|25,00,000|60,00,000|
|Consideration received|30,00,000 as on|30,00,000 as on|30,00,000 as on|30,00,000 as on|

# 3.522 INCOME TAX LAW

01.11.2033 on maturity

|Consideration received as on|24,00,000|38,00,000|70,00,000|
|---|---|---|---|
|01.11.2034 on maturity| | | |

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034 -35, except LIP X in P.Y. 2033-34.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.

However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” or “B” (any one) can be claimed as exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36.

If the consideration received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “A” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not be exempt.

If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “B” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.

Alternative treatment: If the consideration under LIP “X” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee, then, the consideration received under LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36 since the aggregate of the annual premium payable for the LIPs “A” and “B” together did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two policies. However, the most beneficial treatment is to claim LIP “X” and “B” as exempt.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

It may be noted that in every case, the consideration received for LIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).

# Example 10:

|LIP|X|Y|A|B|C|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Date of issue|1.4.2023|1.4.2023|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|1.4.2024|
|Annual premium|2,00,000|2,00,000|2,00,000|3,00,000|6,00,000|
|Sum assured|20,00,000|20,00,000|20,00,000|30,00,000|60,00,000|
|Consideration received on surrender as on 1.7.2033|12,00,000|12,00,000|12,00,000|12,00,000|12,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2034 on maturity|24,00,000|24,00,000|24,00,000|24,00,000|24,00,000|
|Consideration received as on 01.11.2035 on maturity| | |24,00,000|36,00,000|70,00,000|

Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2035-36, except a LIP “X” and “Y”.

Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35, since the annual premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

The consideration received under LIP “Y” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36, since the aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “Y” does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and annual premium payable for LIP “Y” does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.

The consideration received under LIPs “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37, since aggregate of annual premium.
# 3.524 INCOME TAX LAW

premium payable for these three policies and LIP “X” and “Y” exceeds ` 5,00,000.

# Alternative treatment:

If the consideration on surrender under LIP “X” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee, then the consideration received under LIP “Y” would be exempt and the consideration received under LIP “A” or LIP “B” (any one) can be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37. If the consideration received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt, as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “A” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not be exempt.

If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “B” did not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.

If the consideration on surrender of LIP “X” and on maturity of LIP “Y” were not claimed to be exempt under section 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35 and A.Y.2035-36, respectively, then consideration received under both LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be exempt in A.Y.2036-37 (being LIPs issued on or after 1.4.2023, whose aggregate consideration does not exceed ` 5,00,000).

It may be noted that, in every case, consideration received under LIP “C” would not be exempt under section 10(10D).

# Clarification on GST Component:

It is also clarified by the CBDT that the premium payable/ aggregate premium payable for a life insurance policy/policies, other than a ULIP, issued on or after 1.4.2023, for any previous year, would be exclusive of the amount of GST payable on such premium.

# Clarification on premium of Term life insurance policy:

It is further clarified by the CBDT that the limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable would not be applicable in case of a term life insurance policy i.e. where sum under a life insurance policy is only paid to the nominee in case of the death of the person insured during

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.525

The term of the policy and no amount is paid to anyone if the insured person survives the policy tenure. Hence, any sum received under a term insurance policy shall continue to be exempt under section 10(10D), irrespective of the amount of the premium payable in respect of such policy. Further the premium paid for such policies would not be counted for checking the limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable.

# Taxability of sum received under a LIP which is not exempt u/s 10(10D)

Where any sum is received (including the amount allocated by way of bonus) at any time during a previous year, under a life insurance policy, other than the sum (i) received under a ULIP (ii) received under a Keyman insurance policy which is not exempt under section 10(10D), the sum so received as exceeds the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of such life insurance policy, and not claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act, computed in the prescribed manner, would be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no 61/2023 dated 16.8.2023, inserted Rule 11UACA to compute the income chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(xiii). Where any person receives at any time during any previous year any sum under such LIP, then, the income chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(xiii) during the previous year in which such sum is received has to be computed in the following manner –

|Situation|Income chargeable to tax during the previous year in which such sum is received|
|---|---|
|(i) where the sum is received for the first time under the LIP during the previous year (first previous year)|A-B, where A = the sum or aggregate of sum received under the LIP during the first previous year; and B = the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of the LIP till the date of receipt of the sum in the first previous year that has not|

# 3.526 INCOME TAX LAW

been claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act.

(ii) where the sum is received under the LIP during the previous year subsequent to the first previous year (subsequent previous year C-D, where

|C|= the sum or aggregate of sum received under the LIP during the subsequent previous year;|
|---|---|
|D|= the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of the LIP till the date of receipt of the sum in the subsequent previous year not being premium which –|

- (a) has been claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act; or
- (b) is included in “B” or “D” in any of the previous year(s).

“Sum received under a LIP” means any amount, by whatever name called, received under such policy which is not exempt under section 10(10D), other than the sum –

- (a) received under a ULIP; or
- (b) received under a Keyman insurance policy

(ii) Income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” only if not chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” -

1. Any sum received by an employer-assessee from his employees as contributions to any provident fund, superannuation fund or any other fund for the welfare of the employees
2. Income from letting out on hire, machinery, plant or furniture.
3. Where letting out of buildings is inseparable from the letting out of machinery, plant or furniture, the income from such letting.
4. Interest on securities

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.527

However, certain interest income arising to certain persons would be exempt under section 10(15), for example,:

1. Income by way of interest, premium on redemption or other payment on notified securities, bonds, annuity certificates or other savings certificates is exempt subject to such conditions and limits as may be specified in the notification. It may be noted that interest on Post Office Savings Bank Account which was so far fully exempt would henceforth be exempt from tax for any assessment year only to the extent of:
2. - (1) ₹ 3,500 in case of an individual account.
- (2) ₹ 7,000 in case of a joint account.

Interest on Gold Deposit Bond issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates issued under the Gold Monetization Scheme, 2015 notified by the Central Government.
3. Interest on bonds, issued by –
- (a) a local authority; or
- (b) a State Pooled Finance Entity and specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.

“State Pooled Finance Entity” means such entity which is set up in accordance with the guidelines for the Pooled Finance Development Scheme notified by the Central Government in the Ministry of Urban Development.

# Keyman Insurance Policy

Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy is chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” if such income is not chargeable under the head “Profits and gains if business or profession” or under the head “Salaries” i.e. if such sum is received by any person other than the employer who took the policy and the employee in whose name the policy was taken.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.528 INCOME TAX LAW

# (iv) Residual Income:

Any income chargeable to tax under the Act, but not falling under any other head of income shall be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”.

For example, salary received by an MPs/MLAs will not be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Salary’ but will be chargeable as “Income from other sources” under section 56. However, the following incomes of Members of Parliament or State Legislatures will be exempt under section 10(17):

- Daily Allowance - Daily allowance received by any Member of Parliament or of any State Legislatures or any Committee thereof.
- Constituency Allowance of MPs - In the case of a Member of Parliament, any allowance received under Members of Parliament (Constituency Allowance) Rules, 1986;
- Constituency allowance of MLAs - Any constituency allowance received by any person by reason of his membership of any State Legislature under any Act or rules made by that State Legislature.

There are other exemptions also in respect of certain incomes which are as follows:

1. Interest on moneys standing to the credit of individual in his NRE A/c [Section 10(4)(ii)]

As per section 10(4)(ii), in the case of an individual, any income by way of interest on moneys standing to his credit in a Non-resident (External) Account (NRE A/c) in any bank in India in accordance Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA, 1999), and the rules made thereunder, would be exempt, provided such individual;

- is a person resident outside India, as defined in FEMA, 1999, or
- is a person who has been permitted by the Reserve Bank of India to maintain such account.

In this context, it may be noted that the joint holders of the NRE Account do not constitute an AOP by merely having these accounts in joint names. The benefit of exemption under section 10(4)(ii) will be available to such joint account holders, subject to fulfillment of other conditions contained in that section by each of the individual joint account holders.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.529

# 2. Compensation received on account of disaster [Section 10(10BC)]

1. This clause exempts any amount received or receivable as compensation by an individual or his legal heir on account of any disaster.
2. Such compensation should be granted by the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority.
3. However, exemption would not be available in respect of compensation for alleviating any damage or loss, which has already been allowed as deduction under the Act.
4. "Disaster" means a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from natural or manmade causes, or by accident or negligence. It should have the effect of causing -
1. substantial loss of life or human suffering; or
2. damage to, and destruction of, property; or
3. damage to, or degradation of, environment.

It should be of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the community of the affected area.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Compensation on account of disaster received from a local authority by an individual or his/her legal heir is taxable. Examine the correctness of the statement with reference to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

# SOLUTION

The statement is not correct. As per section 10(10BC), any amount received or receivable as compensation by an individual or his/her legal heir on account of any disaster from the Central Government, State Government or a local authority is exempt from tax. However, the exemption is not available to the extent such individual or legal heir has already been allowed a deduction under this Act on account of such loss or damage caused by such disaster.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3. Educational scholarships [Section 10(16)]

The value of scholarship granted to meet the cost of education would be exempt from tax in the hands of the recipient irrespective of the amount or source of scholarship.

# 4. Awards for literary, scientific and artistic works and other awards by the Government [Section 10(17A)]

Any award instituted in the public interest by the Central/State Government or by any other body approved by the Central Government and a reward by Central/State Government for such purposes as may be approved by the Central Government in public interest, will enjoy exemption under this clause.

# 5. Payment in commutation of pension received from a set up by LIC [Section 10(10A)]

Any commuted pension received by an individual from a fund set up by LIC of India, approved by Controller of Insurance or IRDA of India will be exempted.

# Interest from non-SLR Securities of Banks: Whether chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”? [Circular No. 18, dated 2.11.2015]

The issue addressed by this circular is whether in the case of banks, expenses relatable to investment in non-SLR securities need to be disallowed under section 57(i), by considering interest on non-SLR securities as “Income from other sources."

Section 56(1)(id) provides that income by way of interest on securities shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from Other Sources", if the income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits and Gains of Business and Profession".

The CBDT clarified that the investments made by a banking concern are part of the business of banking. Therefore, the income arising from such investments is attributable to the business of banking falling under the head "Profits and Gains of Business and Profession".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.531

# 5.4 APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF CASUAL INCOME OTHER THAN WINNINGS FROM ANY ONLINE GAME [SECTION 115BB]

1. This section provides that income by way of winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races or card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form would be taxed at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and education cess@4%. However, income by way of winnings from any online game would not be taxed under this section.
2. No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
3. Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
4. Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted against such income.

# 5.5 APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF WINNINGS FROM ONLINE GAMES [SECTION 115BBJ]

1. This section provides that net winnings from any online game would be taxed at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and education cess@4%.
2. Meaning of online games: A game that is offered on the internet and is accessible by a user through a computer resource including any telecommunication device.
3. No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
4. Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
5. Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted against such income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.532 INCOME TAX LAW

# 5.6 DEDUCTIONS ALLOWABLE [SECTION 57]

The income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” shall be computed after making the following deductions:

1. In the case of dividend (other than deemed dividend arise on account of buy-back of shares by a domestic company) or income in respect of units of a mutual fund9 or income in respect of units of a specified company10:
- Interest expenditure to earn such income is allowed as deduction subject to a maximum of 20% of such income included in the total income, without deduction under this section.
- No deduction in respect of any expenditure is allowed in case of deemed dividend arise on account of buy-back of shares by a domestic company.
2. In the case of interest on securities: Any reasonable sum paid by way of commission or remuneration to a banker or any other person for the purpose of realising such interest on behalf of the assessee.
3. Income consists of recovery from employees as contribution to any provident fund etc. in terms of section 2(24)(x): A deduction will be allowed in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1)(va) i.e., to the extent the contribution is remitted before the due date under the respective Acts.
4. Where the income to be charged under this head is from letting on hire of machinery, plant and furniture, with or without building: The following items of deductions are allowable in the computation of such income:
- the amount paid on account of any current repairs to the machinery, plant, furniture or building.
- the amount of any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk of damage or destruction of the machinery or plant, furniture or building.
- the normal depreciation allowance in respect of the machinery, plant or furniture, due thereon.

9 Specified u/s 10(23D)

10 Defined in the Explanation to section 10(35)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.533

(v) In the case of income in the nature of family pension: A deduction of a sum equal to 33-1/3 per cent of such income or ₹ 15,000 (in case of option regime) or ₹ 25,000 (in case of default regime), whichever is less, is allowable.

For the purposes of this deduction, “family pension” means a regular monthly amount payable by the employer to a person belonging to the family of an employee in the event of his death.

# Exemption in respect of family pension

1. The family pension received by the widow or children or nominated heirs, of a member of the armed forces (including para-military forces) of the Union, where the death of such member has occurred in the course of operational duties, in specified circumstances would, however, be exempt under section 10(19).
2. The family pension received by any member of the family of an individual who had been in the service of Central or State Government and had been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or other notified gallantry awards would be exempt u/s 10(18)(ii).

(vi) Any other expenditure not being in the nature of capital expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of making or earning such income.

(vii) In case of income by way of interest on compensation/enhanced compensation received chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(viii): Deduction of 50% of such income. No deduction would be allowable under any other clause of section 57 in respect of such income.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Interest on enhanced compensation received by Mr. G during the previous year 2024-25 is ₹ 5,00,000. Out of this interest, ₹ 1,50,000 relates to the previous year 2020-21, ₹ 1,65,000 relates to previous year 2021-22 and ₹ 1,85,000 relates to previous year 2022-23. Discuss the tax implication, if any, of such interest income for A.Y.2025-26.

# SOLUTION

The entire interest of ₹ 5,00,000 would be taxable in the year of receipt, namely, P.Y. 2024-25.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.534 INCOME TAX LAW

|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|Interest on enhanced compensation taxable u/s 56(2)(viii)|5,00,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 57(iv) @50%|2,50,000|
|Interest chargeable under the head “Income from other sources”|2,50,000|

# 5.7 DEDUCTIONS NOT ALLOWABLE [SECTION 58]

No deduction shall be made in computing the “Income from other sources” of an assessee in respect of the following items of expenses:

1. In the case of any assessee:
1. any personal expense of the assessee;
2. any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
3. any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source.
2. Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person: In addition to these disallowances, section 58(2) specifically provides that the disallowance of any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV and disallowance of payment or aggregate of payments exceeding ` 10,000 or ` 35,000, as the case may be, made to a person during a day otherwise than by account payee cheque or draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay covered by section 40A will be applicable to the computation of income under the head ‘Income from other sources’ as well.
3. Disallowance of 30% of expenditure: 30% of expenditure shall not be allowed, in respect of a sum which is payable to a resident and on which tax is deductible at source, if
- such tax has not been deducted or;
- such tax after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date of return specified in section 139(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.535

In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by reason that such payee –

1. has furnished his return of income under section 139;
2. has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
3. has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income, and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed,

it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum.

The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.

(iv) No deduction in respect of any expenditure incurred in connection with casual income: No deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance in connection with income by way of earnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form or nature whatsoever shall be allowed in computing the said income.

The prohibition will not, however, apply in respect of the income of an assessee, being the owner of race horses, from the activity of owning and maintaining such horses. In respect of the activity of owning and maintaining race horses, expenses incurred shall be allowed even in the absence of any stake money earned. Such loss shall be allowed to be carried forward in accordance with the provisions of section 74A.

# 5.8 DEEMED INCOME CHARGEABLE TO TAX

# [SECTION 59]

The provisions of section 41(1) are made applicable, so far as may be, to the computation of income under this head. Accordingly, where a deduction has been made in respect of a loss, expenditure or liability and subsequently any amount is received or benefit is derived in respect of such expenditure incurred or loss or trading liability allowed as deduction, then, it shall be deemed as income in the year in which the amount is received or the benefit is accrued.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.536 INCOME TAX LAW

# LET US RECAPITULATE

Where any income, profits or gains includible in the total income of an assessee, cannot be included under any of the other heads, it would be chargeable under the head ‘Income from other sources’. Hence, this head is the residuary head of income [Section 56(1)]

# Specific Incomes Chargeable under this head [Section 56(2)]

1. Dividend Income
2. Casual income (winnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games, gambling, betting etc.). Such winnings are chargeable to tax at a flat rate of 30% under section 115BB and in case of online games, net winnings therefrom is chargeable to tax @30% u/s 115BBJ and no expenditure or deduction under Chapter VIA can be allowed from such income. No loss can be set-off against such income and even the unexhausted basic exemption limit cannot be exhausted against such income.
3. Sum of money or property received by any person [Section 56(2)(x)]
|Nature of asset|Particulars|Taxable value|
|---|---|---|
|1. Money|Without consideration|The whole amount, if the same exceeds ` 50,000.|
|2. Movable property|Without consideration|The aggregate fair market value of the property, if it exceeds ` 50,000.|
|3. Movable property|Inadequate consideration|The difference between the aggregate fair market value and the consideration, if such difference exceeds ` 50,000.|
|4. Immovable property|Without consideration|The stamp value of the property, if it exceeds ` 50,000.|
|5. Immovable property|Inadequate consideration|The difference between the stamp duty value and the consideration, if such difference exceeds the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of consideration.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.537

# Receipts exempted from the applicability of section 56(2)(x)

Any sum of money or value of property received:

- (a) from any relative; or
- (b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
- (c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
- (d) in contemplation of death of the payer or donor, as the case may be; or
- (e) from any local authority; or
- (f) from any fund or university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or institution; or
- (g) from or by any registered trust or institution;
- (h) by any fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution;
- (i) by way of transaction not regarded as transfer under specified clauses of section 47;
- (j) from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the benefit of relative of the individual;
- (k) from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed;
- (l) by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19 subject to conditions notified by the Central Government;
- (m) by a member of the family of a deceased person:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.538 INCOME TAX LAW

# (4) Other receipts chargeable under this head

|Section|Provision|
|---|---|
|56(2)(viii)|Interest received on compensation/enhanced compensation deemed to be income in the year of receipt and taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources”.|
|56(2)(ix)|Any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset, if such sum is forfeited and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such asset (in a case where advance is received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014).|
|56(2)(xi)|Compensation or other payment, due to or received by any person, by whatever name called, in connection with termination of his employment or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto.|
|56(2)(xii)|Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D).|

# Exemptions [Section 10]

|Section|Provision|
|---|---|
|10(4)(ii)|Income by way of interest on moneys standing to his credit in a Non-resident (External) Account (NRE A/c), is exempt in the hands of an individual, being a person resident outside India as per the FEMA, 1999 or in the hands of an individual who has been permitted by the RBI to maintain such account.|
|10(10BC)|Compensation received or receivable from the Central Government, State Government or local authority by an individual or his legal heir on account of any disaster is exempt except to the extent of loss or damage allowed as deduction under the Act.|
|10(16)|The value of scholarship granted to meet the cost of education would be exempt from tax in the hands of the recipient irrespective of the amount or source of scholarship.|
|10(17)|Daily allowance and Constituency allowance received by any Member of Parliament or of State Legislatures is exempt.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.539

# 10(17A)

Payment, whether in cash or kind, in pursuance of an award instituted in public interest by the Govt or reward by the Govt. for approved purposes is exempt.

# 10(10A)

Any commuted pension received by an individual from a fund set up by LIC of India or any other insurer under a pension scheme, approved by Controller of Insurance or IRDA of India will be exempted.

# Deductions allowable [Section 57]

|S. No.|Particulars|Deduction|
|---|---|---|
|1.|In case of dividend (other than deemed dividend arise on account of buy-back of shares by a domestic company) or income in respect of units of mutual fund or income in respect of units from a specified company|Interest expenditure to earn such income. However, such interest expenses cannot exceed 20% of such income included in total income, without deduction under this section.|
|2.|In case of interest on securities|Any reasonable sum paid by way of commission or remuneration to a banker or any other person.|
|3.|Income consists of recovery from employees as contribution to any PF, superannuation fund etc.|Amount of contribution remitted before the due date under the respective Acts, in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1)(va)|
|4.|Income from letting on hire of machinery, plant and furniture, with or without building|Current repairs to the machinery, plant, furniture or building, insurance premium, depreciation/unabsorbed depreciation|
|5.|Family Pension|Sum equal to - 33 1/3% of such income or - ₹ 15,000 (in case optional regime) or - ₹ 25,000 (in case of default regime), whichever is less|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.540 INCOME TAX LAW

# 6. Interest on compensation

50% of such interest income enhanced compensation received

# Deductions not allowable [Section 58]

|S. No.|Deductions not allowable|
|---|---|
|1.|Any personal expense of the assessee|
|2.|Any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.|
|3.|Any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source.|
|4.|Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV.|
|5.|Any expenditure in respect of which a payment or aggregate payments exceeding ` 10,000 is made to a person in a day otherwise than by account payee cheque or draft or ECS through bank account or through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay.|
|6.|Any expenditure or allowance in connection with income by way of earnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form or nature.|
|7.|30% of expenditure in respect of sum which is payable to a resident on which tax is deductible at source, if such tax has not been deducted or after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date of return specified in section 139(1).|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.541

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Examine under which heads the following incomes are taxable:
1. Rental income in case property held as stock-in-trade for 3 years
2. Salary received by a partner from his partnership firm
3. Rental income of machinery
4. Winnings from lotteries by a person having the same as business activity
5. Salaries received by a Member of Parliament
6. Receipts without consideration
7. In case of retirement, interest on employee’s contribution if provident fund is unrecognized.
8. Rental income in case of a person engaged in the business of letting out of commercial properties.
2. Examine whether the following are chargeable to tax and the amount liable to tax:
1. A sum of ` 1,20,000 was received as gift from non-relatives by Raj on the occasion of the marriage of his son Pravin.
2. Interest on enhanced compensation of ` 96,000 received on 12-3-2025 for an acquisition of urban land, of which 40% relates to P.Y.2023-24.
3. On 10.10.2024, Mr. Govind (a bank employee) received ` 5,00,000 towards interest on enhanced compensation from State Government in respect of compulsory acquisition of his land effected during the financial year 2016-17. Out of this interest, ` 1,50,000 relates to the financial year 2017-18; ` 1,65,000 to the financial year 2018-19; and ` 1,85,000 to the financial year 2019-20. He incurred ` 50,000 by way of legal expenses to receive the interest on such enhanced compensation. How much of interest on enhanced compensation would be chargeable to tax in the A.Y.2025-26?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.542 INCOME TAX LAW

The following details have been furnished by Mrs. Hemali pertaining to the year ended 31.3.2025:

1. Cash gift of ` 51,000 received from her friend on the occasion of her “Shastiaptha Poorthi”, a wedding function celebrated on her husband completing 60 years of age. This was also her 25th wedding anniversary.
2. On the above occasion, a diamond necklace worth ` 2 lacs was presented by her sister living in Dubai.
3. When she celebrated her daughter's wedding on 21.2.2025, her friend assigned in Mrs. Hemali's favour, a fixed deposit held by the said friend in a scheduled bank; the value of the fixed deposit and the accrued interest on the said date was ` 52,000.

Compute the income, if any, assessable as “Income from other sources” for A.Y.2025-26.

# 5. Examine the following transactions in the context of Income-tax Act, 1961:

1. Mr. B transferred 500 shares of R (P) Ltd. to M/s. B Co. (P) Ltd. on 10.10.2024 for ` 3,00,000 when the fair market value was ` 5,00,000. The indexed cost of acquisition of shares for Mr. B was computed at ` 4,45,000. The transfer was not subjected to securities transaction tax. Determine the income chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. B and M/s. B Co. (P) Ltd. because of the above said transaction.
2. Mr. Chezian is employed in a company with taxable salary income of ` 5,00,000. He received a sum of ` 1,00,000 from Atma Charitable Trust (registered under section 12AB) by account payee cheque in December 2024 for meeting his medical expenses. Is the sum of money so received from the trust chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. Chezian?

# ANSWERS

1. Head under which following incomes are taxable:

|Particulars|Head of Income|
|---|---|
|(i) Rental income in case property held as stock-in trade for 3 years|Income from house property|

# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

(ii) Salary by partner from his Profits and gains of business or profession

(iii) Rental income of machinery (See Note below) Profits and gains of business or profession/Income from other sources

(iv) Winnings from lotteries by a person having the same as business activity Income from other sources

(v) Salaries payable to a Member of Parliament Income from other sources

(vi) Receipts without consideration Income from other sources

(vii) In case of retirement, interest on employee’s contribution if provident fund is unrecognized Income from other sources

(viii) Rental income in case of a person engaged in the business of letting out of commercial properties Profits and gains from business or profession

Note - As per section 56(2)(ii), rental income of machinery would be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources”, if the same is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

# 2. Taxability of Receipts

|S. No.|Taxable/Not Taxable|Amount liable to tax (`)|Answer|Reason|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|(i)|Taxable|1,20,000|The exemption from applicability of section 56(2)(x) would be available if, inter alia, gift is received from a relative or gift is received on the occasion of marriage of the individual himself. In this case, since gift is received by Mr. Raj from a non-relative on the occasion of marriage of his son, it would be taxable in his hands under section 56(2)(x).| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3. INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Taxable 48,000 As per section 145B(1), interest received by the assessee on enhanced compensation shall be deemed to be the income of the year in which it is received, irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee.

Interest of 96,000 on enhanced compensation is chargeable to tax in the year of receipt i.e. P.Y. 2024-25 under section 56(2)(viii) after providing deduction of 50% under section 57(iv). Therefore, 48,000 is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”.

Section 145B provides that interest received by the assessee on enhanced compensation shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the year in which it is received, irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee and irrespective of the financial year to which it relates. Section 56(2)(viii) states that such income shall be taxable as ‘Income from other sources’. 50% of such income shall be allowed as deduction by virtue of section 57(iv) and no other deduction shall be permissible from such Income. Therefore, legal expenses incurred to receive the interest on enhanced compensation would not be allowed as deduction from such income.

# Computation of interest on enhanced compensation taxable as “Income from other sources” for the A.Y 2025-26:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Interest on enhanced compensation taxable u/s 56(2)(viii)|5,00,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 57(iv) (50% x ` 5,00,000)|2,50,000|
|Taxable interest on enhanced compensation|2,50,000|

# (i) Any sum of money received by an individual on the occasion of the marriage of the individual is exempt. This provision is, however, not applicable to a cash gift received during a wedding function celebrated on completion of 60 years of age.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES

3.545

The gift of ` 51,000 received from a non-relative is, therefore, chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mrs. Hemali, since the same exceeds ` 50,000.

(ii) The provisions of section 56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of any sum of money or property received from a relative. Thus, the gift of diamond necklace received from her sister, being a relative, is not taxable under section 56(2)(x), even though jewellery falls within the definition of “property”.

(iii) To be exempt from applicability of section 56(2)(x), the property should be received on the occasion of the marriage of the individual, not that of the individual’s son or daughter. Therefore, this exemption provision is not attracted in this case.

Any sum of money received without consideration by an individual is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x), if the aggregate value exceeds ` 50,000 in a year. “Sum of money” has, however, not been defined under section 56(2)(x).

Therefore, there are two possible views in respect of the value of fixed deposit assigned in favour of Mrs. Hemali –

1. The first view is that fixed deposit does not fall within the meaning of “sum of money” and therefore, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) are not attracted. It may be noted that fixed deposit is also not included in the definition of “property”.
2. However, another possible view is that fixed deposit assigned in favour of Mrs. Hemali falls within the meaning of “sum of money” received.

# Income assessable as “Income from other sources”

If the first view is taken, the total amount chargeable to tax as “Income from other sources” would be ` 51,000, being cash gift received from a friend on her Shastiaptha Poorthi.

As per the second view, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would also be attracted in respect of the fixed deposit assigned and the “Income from other sources” of Mrs. Hemali would be ` 1,03,000 (` 51,000 + ` 52,000).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 3.546 INCOME TAX LAW

# (i)

Any movable property received for inadequate consideration by any person is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x), if the difference between aggregate Fair Market Value of the property and consideration exceeds ` 50,000.

Thus, share received by M/s B. Co. (P) Ltd. from Mr. B for inadequate consideration is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) to the extent of ` 2,00,000.

As per section 50CA, since, the consideration is less than the fair market value of unquoted shares of R (P) Ltd., fair market value of shares of the company would be deemed to be the full value of consideration. It is presumed that the shares of R (P) Ltd are unquoted shares.

The full value of consideration (` 5,00,000) less the indexed cost of acquisition (` 4,45,000) would result in a long term capital gains of ` 55,000 in the hands of Mr. B.

# (ii)

The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not apply to any sum of money or any property received from any trust or institution registered under section 12AB. Therefore, the sum of ` 1 lakh received from Atma Charitable Trust, being a trust registered under section 12AB, for meeting medical expenses would not be chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mr. Chezian.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 4

# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to -

- identify when clubbing provisions are attracted and apply the same in computing total income of the assessee;
- examine the circumstances when income of the spouse is included in the income of the individual and apply the same in computing total income of the individual;
- examine the circumstances when income of son’s wife is included in the hands of the individual and apply the same in computing total income of the individual;
- identify the nature of income of minor, in respect of which clubbing provisions are not attracted;
- examine how minor’s income is included in the hands of the parent and compute the amount to be included in the hands of the parent;
- examine the circumstances when income of HUF is included in the hands of a member of the HUF.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.2

Income arising for the benefit of any person or AOPs from assets transferred without adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(viii)]

Income of son's wife

Income arising from an asset transferred to son's wife without adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(vi)]

Income of a minor child suffering from disability shall not be clubbed with the income of parent, whose total income is greater. Exemption u/s 10(32) is available if that parent has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

Minor's income, excluding income of upto 1,500 per minor, is clubbed [Section 64(1A)].

Exceptions from skill, talent, manual work or experience will not be clubbed.

Income of other persons included in assessee's total income to any person or AOPs from assets transferred without adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(vii)].

Transferor will be deemed as owner of such property as per section 27(i). In case of transfer of house property to spouse without adequate consideration, spouse's income arising to [Section 64(1)(iv)]

Income arising to spouse from an asset transferred without adequate consideration or agreement to live apart not in connection with an [Section 64(1)(ii)].

Remuneration to spouse from a concern in which individual has a substantial interest will not apply if spouse possesses professional, technical or qualifications.

Where spouse derives no direct or indirect benefit from such income, clubbing provisions would apply as and when power to revoke arises.

Income arising from a trust which is not revocable during the lifetime of the beneficiary or in case of any other revocable transfer, not [Section 61].

Transfer of income without transfer of assets [Section 60].
# 1. CLUBBING OF INCOME – AN INTRODUCTION

Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, an assessee is generally taxed in respect of his own income. However, there are certain cases where an assessee has to pay tax in respect of income of another person. The provisions for the same are contained in sections 60 to 64 of the Act. These provisions have been enacted to counteract the tendency on the part of the tax-payers to dispose of their property or transfer their income in such a way that their tax liability can be avoided or reduced. These provisions can be categorized as follows:

- Income of other persons included in an assessee’s total income [Sections 60-63]
- Income of other persons included in an Individual’s total income [Section 64]

Note - In the case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total income. The tax system is progressive i.e. as the income increases, the applicable rate of tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize their tax burden. In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been incorporated in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse, minor child etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted his income for the purpose of computing tax liability.

# 2. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# 2.1 Transfer of income without transfer of asset [Section 60]

1. If any person transfers the income from any asset without transferring the asset itself, such income is to be included in the total income of the transferor.
2. It is immaterial whether the transfer is revocable or irrevocable and whether it was made before the commencement of this Act or after its commencement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.4 INCOME TAX LAW

Example 1: Mr. A confers the right to receive rent in respect of his house property to his wife, Mrs. A, without transferring the house itself to her. In this case, the rent received by Mrs. A will be clubbed with the income of Mr. A.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. Vatsan has transferred, through a duly registered document, the income arising from a godown to his son, without transferring the godown. In whose hands will the rental income from godown be charged?

# SOLUTION

Section 60 expressly states that where there is transfer of income from an asset without transfer of the asset itself, such income shall be included in the total income of the transferor. Hence, the rental income derived from the godown shall be clubbed in the hands of Mr. Vatsan.

# 2.2 Income arising from revocable transfer of assets [Section 61]

All income arising to any person by virtue of a revocable transfer of assets is to be included in the total income of the transferor.

# Meaning of revocable transfer [Section 63]

Transfer is deemed to be revocable if—

- (a) it contains any provision for the retransfer, directly or indirectly, of the whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor, or
- (b) it gives, in any way to the transferor, a right to reassume power, directly or indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or the assets.

Clubbing provision will operate even if only part of income of the transferred asset had been applied for the benefit of the transferor. Once the transfer is revocable, the entire income from the transferred asset is includible in the total income of the transferor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED

# 4.5 IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

Exception where clubbing provisions are not attracted even in case of revocable transfer [Section 62]

Section 61 will not apply to any income arising to any person if there is –

1. a transfer by way of trust which is not revocable during the life time of the beneficiary; and
2. any other transfer, which is not revocable during the life time of the transferee.

In the above cases, the income from the transferred asset is not includible in the total income of the transferor, provided the transferor derives no direct or indirect benefit from such income.

If the transferor receives direct or indirect benefit from such income, such income is to be included in his total income even though the transfer may not be revocable during the life time of the beneficiary or transferee, as the case may be.

As and when the power to revoke the transfer arises, the income arising by virtue of such transfer will be included in the total income of the transferor.

Example 2: Mr. Rajesh transfers his house property to a trust for the benefit of Mr. Ramesh till his death. This is a situation of irrevocable transfer till the death of Mr. Ramesh. Hence, till then, the income from house property would be taxable in the hands of the transferee i.e., the trust. However, after the death of Mr. Ramesh, the income from house property would be included in the total income of Mr. Rajesh as on that date, the transfer has become revocable.

# 3. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN INDIVIDUAL’S TOTAL INCOME

# 3.1 Clubbing of income arising to spouse

(I) Income by way of remuneration from a concern in which the individual has substantial interest [Section 64(1)(ii)]

(i) Remuneration in cash or kind to spouse from a concern in which the individual has a substantial interest to be clubbed: In computing the total income of any individual, all such income which arises, directly or
# 4.6 INCOME TAX LAW

indirectly, to the spouse of such individual by way of salary, commission, fees or any other form of remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, from a concern in which such individual has a substantial interest shall be included.

# Circumstances when an individual is deemed to have substantial interest in a concern

|Where the concern|In any other case|
|---|---|
|is a company|If equity shares carrying 20% or more of voting power are beneficially owned by such person or partly by such person and partly by one or more of his relatives at any time during the P.Y.|
| |If such person is entitled, or such person and one or more of his relatives are entitled in the aggregate, to receive 20% or more profit of such concern at any time during the P.Y.|

The term ‘relative’ in relation to an individual means the husband, wife, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant of that individual [Section 2(41)].

(ii) Clubbing provisions will not apply where remuneration is received on account of technical or professional qualifications: Clubbing provisions, however, does not apply where the spouse of the said individual possesses technical or professional qualifications and the income to the spouse is solely attributable to the application of his/her technical or professional knowledge or experience. In such an event, the income arising to such spouse is to be assessed in his/her hands.

(iii) Both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern: Where both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern and both are in receipt of income by way of salary etc. from the said concern, such income will be includible in the hands of that spouse, whose total income, excluding such income is higher.

Where any such income is once included in the total income of either spouse, income arising in the succeeding year shall not be included in the total income of the other spouse unless the Assessing Officer is satisfied, after giving that spouse an opportunity of being heard, that it is necessary to do so.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd. Mrs. A is working as a computer software programmer in X (P) Ltd. at a salary of ` 30,000 p.m. She is, however, not qualified for the job. The other income of Mr. A & Mrs. A are ` 7,00,000 & ` 4,00,000, respectively. Compute the gross total income of Mr. A and Mrs. A for the A.Y.2025-26 if they are paying tax under default tax regime.

# SOLUTION

Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd i.e., a substantial interest in the company. His wife is working in the same company without any professional qualifications for the same. Thus, by virtue of the clubbing provisions of the Act, the salary received by Mrs. A from X (P) Ltd. will be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A.

# Computation of Gross total income of Mr. A

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salary received by Mrs. A (` 30,000 × 12)|3,60,000| |
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)|75,000|2,85,000|
|Other Income| |7,00,000|
|Gross total income| |9,85,000|

The gross total income of Mrs. A is ` 4,00,000.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Will your answer be different if Mrs. A was qualified for the job?

# SOLUTION

If Mrs. A possesses professional qualifications for the job, then the clubbing provisions shall not be applicable.

Gross total income of Mr. A = ` 7,00,000 [Other income].

Gross total income of Mrs. A = Salary received by Mrs. A [` 30,000×12] less ` 75,000, being the standard deduction under section 16(ia) plus other income [` 4,00,000] = ` 6,85,000.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. B holds shares carrying 30% voting power in Y (P) Ltd. Mrs. B is working as accountant in Y (P) Ltd. getting income under the head salary (computed) of
# 4.8 INCOME TAX LAW

` 3,44,000 without any qualification in accountancy. Mr. B also receives ` 30,000 as interest on securities. Mrs. B owns a house property which she has let out. Rent received from tenants is ` 6,000 p.m. Compute the gross total income of Mr. B and Mrs. B for the A.Y.2025-26.

# SOLUTION

Since Mrs. B is not professionally qualified for the job, the clubbing provisions shall be applicable.

# Computation of Gross total income of Mr. B

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income under the head “Salary” of Mrs. B (Computed)|3,44,000|
|Income from other sources| |
|- Interest on securities|30,000|
|Gross total income|3,74,000|

# Computation of Gross total income of Mrs. B

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from Salary|Nil|[Clubbed in the hands of Mr. B]|
|Income from house property| | |
|Gross Annual Value [` 6,000 × 12]|72,000| |
|Less: Municipal taxes paid|-| |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|72,000| |
|Less: Deductions under section 24| | |
|- 30% of NAV i.e., 30% of ` 72,000|21,600| |
|- Interest on loan|-|50,400|
|Gross total income|50,400| |

# (II) Income arising to the spouse from an asset transferred without adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(iv)]

(i) Transfer of asset (other than house property): Where there is a transfer of an asset (other than house property), directly or indirectly, from one spouse to the other, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

In connection with an agreement to live apart, any income arising to the transferee-spouse from the transferred asset, either directly or indirectly, shall be included in the total income of the transferor-spouse.

1. Transfer of house property: In the case of transfer of house property, the provisions are contained in section 27. If an individual transfers a house property to his spouse, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in connection with an agreement to live apart, the transferor shall be deemed to be the owner of the house property and its annual value will be taxed in his hands.
2. Income from accretion of the transferred asset: It may be noted that any income from the accretion of the transferred asset is not to be clubbed with the income of the transferor. i.e., the income arising on transferred assets alone have to be clubbed. Income earned by investing such income (arising from transferred asset) cannot be clubbed.
3. Meaning of adequate consideration: It is also to be noted that natural love and affection do not constitute adequate consideration. Therefore, where an asset is transferred without adequate consideration, the income from such asset will be clubbed in the hands of the transferor.
4. Transferred asset invested in business: Where the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, by an individual to his spouse are invested by the transferee in the business, proportionate income arising to the transferee from such investment is to be included in the total income of the transferor. If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, proportionate interest receivable by the transferee from the firm will be clubbed with the income of the transferor. Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Mr. Vaibhav started a proprietary business on 01.04.2023 with a capital of ` 5,00,000. He incurred a loss of ` 2,00,000 during the year 2023-24. To overcome the financial position, his wife Mrs. Vaishaly, a software Engineer, gave a gift of
# 4.10 INCOME TAX LAW

` 5,00,000 on 01.04.2024, which was immediately invested in the business by Mr. Vaibhav. He earned a profit of ` 4,00,000 during the year 2024-25. Compute the amount to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2025-26. If Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount as loan, what would be the amount to be clubbed?

# SOLUTION

Section 64(1)(iv) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of income in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the assets (other than house property) transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with an agreement to live apart.

In this case, Mr. Vaibhav received a gift of ` 5,00,000 on 1.4.2024 from his wife Mrs. Vaishaly, which he invested in his business immediately. The income to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2025-26 is computed as under:

|Particulars|Mr. Vaibhav’s capital contribution (`)|Capital contribution out of gift from Mrs. Vaishaly (`)|Total (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Capital as on 1.4.2024|3,00,000|5,00,000|8,00,000|
|(5,00,000 – 2,00,000)| | | |
|Profit for P.Y.2024-25 to be apportioned on the basis of capital employed on the first day of the previous year i.e., as on 1.4.2024 (3:5)|(4,00,000 × 3) / 8|(4,00,000 × 5) / 8| |

Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y.2025-26 is ` 2,50,000.

In case Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount of ` 5,00,000 as a bona fide loan, then, clubbing provisions would not be attracted.

Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of Mr. Vaibhav, since he has received a sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 without consideration from a relative i.e., his wife.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED

# 4.11 IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# (III) Transfer of assets for the benefit of spouse [Section 64(1)(vii)]

All income arising directly or indirectly to any person or association of persons, from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to such person or association of persons by an individual without adequate consideration is includible in the income of the individual to the extent such income is used by the transferee for the immediate or deferred benefit of the transferor’s spouse.

# 3.2 Clubbing of income arising to son’s wife

# (I) Income arising to son’s wife from the assets transferred without adequate consideration by the father-in-law or mother-in-law [Section 64(1)(vi)]

(i) Asset transferred without adequate consideration: Where an asset is transferred, directly or indirectly, by an individual to his or her son’s wife without adequate consideration, the income from such asset is to be included in the total income of the transferor.

(ii) Asset transferred invested in the business: For this purpose, where the assets transferred directly or indirectly by an individual to his or her son’s wife are invested by the transferee in the business, proportionate income arising from such investment is to be included in the total income of the transferor. If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, the proportionate interest receivable from firm will be clubbed with the income of the transferor. Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.

# (II) Transfer of assets for the benefit of son’s wife [Section 64(1)(viii)]

All income arising directly or indirectly, to any person or association of persons from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, without adequate consideration, to such person or association of persons by an individual will be included in the total income of the individual to the extent such income is used by the transferee for the immediate or deferred benefit of the transferor’s son’s wife.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.12 INCOME TAX LAW

Where any asset is transferred by a person to any other person without consideration or for inadequate consideration, the provisions of 56(2)(x) would get attracted in the hands of transferee, if conditions specified thereunder are satisfied.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

Mrs. Kasturi transferred her immovable property to ABC Co. Ltd. subject to a condition that out of the rental income, a sum of ` 36,000 per annum shall be utilized for the benefit of her son’s wife.

Mrs. Kasturi claims that the amount of ` 36,000 (utilized by her son’s wife) should not be included in her total income as she no longer owned the property. Examine with reasons whether the contention of Mrs. Kasturi is valid in law.

# SOLUTION

The clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii) are attracted in case of transfer of any asset, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration, to any person to the extent to which the income from such asset is for the immediate or deferred benefit of son’s wife. Such income shall be included in computing the total income of the transferor-individual.

Therefore, income of ` 36,000 meant for the benefit of daughter-in-law is chargeable to tax in the hands of transferor i.e., Mrs. Kasturi in this case. The contention of Mrs. Kasturi is, hence, not valid in law.

In order to attract the clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii), the transfer should be otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case, it is presumed that the transfer is otherwise than for adequate consideration and therefore, the clubbing provisions are attracted. Moreover, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would also get attracted in the hands of ABC Co Ltd., if the conditions specified thereunder are satisfied.

Note – If the transfer was for adequate consideration, the provisions of section 64(1)(viii) would not be attracted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED

# 4.13 IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# 3.3 Clubbing of minor’s income [Section 64(1A)]

1. All income of a minor is to be included in the income of his or her parent.
2. However, the income derived by the minor from manual work or from any activity involving his skill, talent or specialised knowledge or experience will not be included in the income of his parent.
3. The income of the minor will be included in the income of that parent, whose total income, excluding minor’s income, is greater.
4. Once clubbing of minor’s income is done with that of one parent, it will continue to be clubbed with that parent only, in subsequent years. The Assessing Officer, may, however, club the minor’s income with that of the other parent, if, after giving the other parent an opportunity to be heard, he is satisfied that it is necessary to do so.
5. Where the marriage of the parents does not subsist, the income of the minor will be includible in the income of that parent who maintains the minor child in the relevant previous year.
6. However, the income of a minor child suffering from any disability of the nature specified in section 80U shall not be included in the hands of the parent but shall be assessed in the hands of the child.
7. It may be noted that the clubbing provisions are attracted even in respect of income of minor married daughter.

# Exemption in respect of clubbed income of minor [Section 10(32)]

In case the income of an individual (i.e. the parent) includes the income of his minor child in terms of section 64(1A), such parent shall be entitled to exemption of ` 1,500 in respect of each minor child. However, if income of any minor so includible is less than ` 1,500, then, the entire income shall be exempt.

Exemption under section 10(32) would be available to the parent only if he/she exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The same would not be available to him/her under the default tax regime where he/she computes his/her total income as per section 115BAC and pays tax at the concessional rates provided thereunder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.14 INCOME TAX LAW

(viii) In case the asset transferred to a minor child (not being a minor married daughter) without consideration or for inadequate consideration is a house property, then, by virtue of section 27(i), the transferor-parent will be the deemed owner of the house property. Therefore, the income from house property will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-parent, being the deemed owner and not in the hands of the minor child. Consequently, clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect of such income, due to which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) (discussed above) cannot be availed against such income.

However, if the house property is transferred by a parent to his or her minor married daughter, without consideration or for inadequate consideration, then, section 27(i) is not attracted. In such a case, the income from house property will be included u/s 64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose total income before including minor child’s income is higher; and benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in respect of the income so included if he/she exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. A has three minor children – two twin daughters, aged 12 years, and one son, aged 16 years. Income of the twin daughters is ` 2,000 p.a. each and that of the son is ` 1,200 p.a. Mrs. A has transferred her flat to her minor son on 1.4.2024 out of natural love and affection. The flat was let out on the same date and the rental income from the flat is ` 10,000 p.m. Compute the income, in respect of minor children, to be included in the hands of Mr. A and Mrs. A u/s 64(1A) (assuming that Mr. A’s total income is higher than Mrs. A’s total income, before including the income of minor children and both Mr. A and Mrs. A exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

Taxable income, in respect of minor children, in the hands of Mr. A is:

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Twin minor daughters [` 2,000 × 2]|4,000| |
|Less: Exempt under section 10(32) [` 1,500 × 2]|3,000|1,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

|Minor son| |1,200| |
|---|---|---|---|
|Less: Exempt under section 10(32)| |1,200|Nil|
| |Income to be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A| |1,000|

Note – As per section 27(i), Mrs. A is the deemed owner of house property transferred to her minor son. Natural love and affection do not constitute adequate consideration for this purpose. Accordingly, the income from house property of ₹ 84,000 [i.e., ₹ 1,20,000 (-) ₹ 36,000, being 30% of ₹ 1,20,000] would be taxable directly in her hands as the deemed owner of the said property. Consequently, clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect of income from house property, owing to which exemption u/s 10(32) cannot be availed by her.

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Compute the gross total income of Mr. A & Mrs. A from the following information assuming both exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|(a) Salary income (computed) of Mrs. A|2,30,000|
|(b) Income from profession of Mr. A|3,90,000|
|(c) Income of minor son B from company deposit|15,000|
|(d) Income of minor daughter C from special talent|32,000|
|(e) Interest from bank received by C on deposit made out of her special talent|3,000|
|(f) Gift received by C on 30.09.2024 from friend of Mrs. A|2,500|

Brief working is sufficient. Detailed computation under various heads of income is not required.

# SOLUTION

As per the provisions of section 64(1A) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, all the income of a minor child has to be clubbed in the hands of that parent whose total income (excluding the income of the minor) is greater. The income of Mr. A is ₹ 3,90,000 and income of Mrs. A is ₹ 2,30,000. Since the income of Mr. A is greater than that of Mrs. A, the income of the minor children have to be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A.
# 4.16 INCOME TAX LAW

hands of Mr. A. It is assumed that this is the first year when clubbing provisions are attracted.

Income derived by a minor child from any activity involving application of his/her skill, talent, specialised knowledge and experience is not to be clubbed. Hence, the income of minor child C from exercise of special talent will not be clubbed. However, interest from bank deposit has to be clubbed even when deposit is made out of income arising from application of special talent.

The Gross Total Income of Mrs. A is ` 2,30,000. The total income of Mr. A giving effect to the provisions of section 64(1A) is as follows:

# Computation of gross total income of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from profession|3,90,000| |
|Income of minor son B from company deposit|15,000| |
|Less: Exemption under section 10(32)|1,500|13,500|
|Income of minor daughter C| | |
|From special talent – not to be clubbed|-| |
|Interest from bank|3,000| |
|Gift of ` 2,500 received from a non-relative is not taxable under section 56(2)(x) being less than the aggregate limit of ` 50,000|Nil| |
| |3,000| |
|Less : Exemption under section 10(32)|1,500|1,500|
|Gross Total Income| |4,05,000|

# 4. CROSS TRANSFERS

In the case of cross transfers also (e.g., A making gift of ` 50,000 to the wife of his brother B for the purchase of a house by her and a simultaneous gift by B to A’s minor son of shares in a foreign company worth ` 50,000 owned by him), the income from the assets transferred would be assessed in the hands of the deemed transferor if the transfers are so intimately connected as to form part of a single transaction, and each transfer constitutes consideration for the other by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

being mutual or otherwise. Thus, in the instant case, the transfers have been made by A and B to persons who are not their spouse or minor child so as to circumvent the provisions of this section, showing that such transfers constituted consideration for each other.

The Supreme Court, in case of CIT v. Keshavji Morarji [1967] 66 ITR 142, observed that if two transactions are inter-connected and are parts of the same transaction in such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a device to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted. Accordingly, the income arising to Mrs. B from the house property should be included in the total income of B and the dividend from shares transferred to A’s minor son would be taxable in the hands of A, assuming that Mr. A’s income is higher than that of Mrs. A. This is because A and B are the indirect transferors to their minor child and spouse, respectively, of income-yielding assets, so as to reduce their burden of taxation.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother's wife on 14-6-2024. On 12-7-2024, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to Mr. Vasudevan's wife. The gifted amounts were invested as fixed deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and wife of Mr. Vasudevan's brother on 01-8-2024 at 9% interest. Examine the consequences of the above under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the hands of Mr. Vasudevan and his brother.

# SOLUTION

In the given case, Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother’s wife on 14.06.2024 and simultaneously, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to Mr. Vasudevan’s wife on 12.07.2024. The gifted amounts were invested as fixed deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and his brother’s wife. These transfers are in the nature of cross transfers. Accordingly, the income from the assets transferred would be assessed in the hands of the deemed transferor because the transfers are so intimately connected to form part of a single transaction and each transfer constitutes consideration for the other by being mutual or otherwise.

If two transactions are inter-connected and are part of the same transaction in such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a device to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted. It was so held by the Apex Court in CIT vs. Keshavji Morarji (1967) 66 ITR 142.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.18 INCOME TAX LAW

Accordingly, the interest income arising to Mrs. Vasudevan in the form of interest on fixed deposits would be included in the total income of Mr. Vasudevan and interest income arising in the hands of his brother’s wife would be taxable in the hands of Mr. Vasudevan’s brother as per section 64(1), to the extent of amount of cross transfers i.e., ` 5 lakhs.

This is because both Mr. Vasudevan and his brother are the indirect transferors of the income to their respective spouses with an intention to reduce their burden of taxation.

However, the interest income earned by his spouse on fixed deposit of ` 5 lakhs alone would be included in the hands of Mr. Vasudevan’s brother and not the interest income on the entire fixed deposit of ` 6 lakhs, since the cross transfer is only to the extent of ` 5 lakhs.

# 5. CONVERSION OF SELF-ACQUIRED PROPERTY INTO THE PROPERTY OF A HINDU UNDIVIDED FAMILY [SECTION 64(2)]

Section 64(2) deals with the case of conversion of self-acquired property into property of a Hindu undivided family.

(i) Where an individual, who is a member of the HUF, converts at any time after 31-12-1969, his individual property into property of the HUF of which he is a member or throws such property into the common stock of the family or otherwise transfers such individual property, directly or indirectly, to the family otherwise than for adequate consideration, the income from such property shall continue to be included in the total income of the individual.

(ii) Where the converted property has been partitioned, either by way of total or partial partition, the income derived from such converted property as is received by the spouse on partition will be deemed to arise to the spouse from assets transferred indirectly by the individual to the spouse and consequently, such income shall also be included in the total income of the individual who effected the conversion of such property.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED

# 4.19 IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

(iii) Where income from the converted property is included in the total income of an individual under section 64(2), it will be excluded from the total income of the family or, as the case may be, of the spouse of the individual.

# 6. INCOME INCLUDES LOSS

As per the Explanation 2 to section 64, ‘income’ would include ‘loss’. Accordingly, where the specified income to be included in the total income of the individual is a loss, such loss will be taken into account while computing the total income of the individual. It is significant to note that this Explanation applies to clubbing provisions under both sections 64(1) and 64(2).

# 7. DISTINCTION BETWEEN SECTION 61 AND SECTION 64

It may be noted that the main distinction between the two sections is that section 61 applies only to a revocable transfer made by any person while section 64 applies to revocable as well as irrevocable transfers made only by individuals.

Clubbing provisions are attracted in respect of income arising from the assets transferred, however, income arising on accretion of income arising from transferred asset, would not be clubbed except in case of minor child.

Example 3: Mr. X transferred debentures of ` 50,000 carrying 10% p.a. interest to his wife. The interest income of ` 5,000 would be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X. However, in case his wife deposited ` 5,000 in fixed deposits @8% p.a., the interest income of ` 400 arising on FDR would not be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.20 INCOME TAX LAW

# Sentenze onvoe LET US RECAPITULATE

# Fiatning Tools

|Section|Income to be clubbed|Content|
|---|---|---|
|60|Income transferred without transfer of asset|When a person transfers the income accruing from an asset without the transfer of the asset itself, such income is to be included in the total income of the transferor, whether the transfer is revocable or irrevocable.|
|61|Income arising from revocable transfer of assets|Such income is to be included in the hands of the transferor. A transfer is deemed to be revocable if it – (i) contains any provision for re-transfer of the whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor; or (ii) gives right to re-assume power over the whole or any part of the income or the asset.|
|64(1)(ii)|Income arising to spouse by way of remuneration from a concern in which the individual has substantial interest|Such income arising to spouse is to be included in the total income of the individual. However, if remuneration received is attributable to the application of technical or professional knowledge and experience of spouse, then, such income is not to be clubbed.|
|64(1)(iv)|Income arising to spouse from assets transferred without adequate consideration|Income arising from an asset (other than from house property) transferred otherwise than for adequate consideration or not in connection with an agreement to live apart, from one spouse to another shall be included in the total income of the transferor. However, this provision will not apply in the case of transfer of house property, since the transferor-spouse would be the deemed owner as per section 27.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# 64(1)(vi)

Income arising to son’s wife from an asset transferred without adequate consideration by an individual to his or her son’s wife shall be included in the total income of the transferor.

# 64(1)(vii)/64(1)(viii)

Income arising from transfer of assets for the benefit of spouse or son’s wife. All income arising to any person or association of persons from assets transferred without adequate consideration is includible in the income of the transferor, to the extent such income is used by the transferee for the immediate or deferred benefit of the transferor’s spouse or son’s wife.

# 64(1A)

Income of minor child. All income arising or accruing to a minor child (including a minor married daughter) shall be included in the total income of his or her parent. The income of the minor child shall be included with the income of that parent, whose total income, before including minor’s income, is higher. Where the marriage of the parents does not subsist, the income of the minor will be includible in the income of that parent who maintains the minor child in the relevant previous year.

The parent, in whose total income, the income of the minor child or children are included, shall be entitled to exemption of such income subject to a maximum of ` 1,500 per child under section 10(32). Exemption under section 10(32) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

The following income of a minor child shall, however, not be clubbed in the hands of his or her parent –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.22 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) Income from manual work done by him or activity involving application of minor’s skill, talent or specialized knowledge and experience; and

(b) Income of a minor child suffering from any disability specified in section 80U.

In case the asset transferred to a minor child (not being a minor married daughter) without consideration or for inadequate consideration is house property, then, by virtue of section 27(i), the transferor-parent will be the deemed owner of the house property. Therefore, the income from house property will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-parent, being the deemed owner and not in the hands of the minor child. Consequently, clubbing provisions u/s 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect of such income, due to which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) cannot be availed against such income.

However, if the house property is transferred by a parent to his or her minor married daughter without consideration or for inadequate consideration, then, section 27(i) is not attracted. In such a case, the income from house property will be included u/s 64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose total income before including minor child’s income is higher; and benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in respect of the income so included if he/she exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 64(2) Conversion of self-acquired property into the property of a HUF

Where an individual, who is a member of the HUF, converts his individual property into property of the HUF of which he is a member, directly or indirectly, to the family otherwise
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

than for adequate consideration, the income from such property shall continue to be included in the total income of the individual. Where the converted property has been partitioned, either by way of total or partial partition, the income derived from such converted property as is received by the spouse on partition shall also be included in the total income of the individual who effected the conversion of such property.

Note: As per Explanation 2 to section 64 ‘income’ includes ‘loss’. Therefore, clubbing provisions would be attracted in all the above cases, even if there is a loss and not income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.24 INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Sharma has four minor children - 2 daughters and 2 sons. The annual income of 2 daughters were ` 9,000 and ` 4,500 and of sons were ` 6,200 and ` 4,300, respectively. The daughter who has income of ` 4,500 was suffering from a disability specified under section 80U. Compute the amount of income earned by minor children to be clubbed in hands of Mr. Sharma assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. During the previous year 2024-25, the following transactions occurred in respect of Mr. A.
1. Mr. A had a fixed deposit of ` 5,00,000 in Bank of India. He instructed the bank to credit the interest on the deposit @ 9% p.a. from 1-4-2024 to 31-3-2025 to the savings bank account of Mr. B, son of his brother, to help him in his education.
2. Mr. A holds 75% profit share in a partnership firm. Mrs. A received a commission of ` 25,000 from the firm for promoting the sales of the firm. Mrs. A possesses no technical or professional qualification.
3. Mr. A gifted a flat to Mrs. A on April 1, 2024. During the previous year 2024-25, Mrs. A’s “Income from house property” (computed) was ` 52,000 from such flat.
4. Mr. A gifted ` 2,00,000 to his minor son who invested the same in a business and he derived income of ` 20,000 from the investment.
5. Mr. A’s minor son derived an income of ` 20,000 through a business activity involving application of his skill and talent.

During the year, Mr. A got a monthly pension of ` 10,000. He had no other income. Mrs. A received salary of ` 20,000 per month from a part time job. Examine the tax implications of each transaction and compute the total income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor child assuming that they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

3. Mr. A has gifted a house property valued at ` 50 lakhs to his wife, Mrs. B, who in turn has gifted the same to Mrs. C, their daughter-in-law. The house was let out at ` 25,000 per month throughout the year. Compute the total income of Mr. A and Mrs. C. Will your answer be different if the said property was gifted to his son, husband of Mrs. C?

4. A proprietary business was started by Smt. Rani in the year 2022. As on 1.4.2023 her capital in business was ` 3,00,000. Her husband gifted ` 2,00,000 on 10.4.2023 to her and such sum is invested by Smt. Rani in her business on the same date. Smt. Rani earned profits from her proprietary business for the Financial Year 2023-24, ` 1,50,000 and Financial Year 2024-25 ` 3,90,000. Compute the income, to be clubbed in the hands of Rani’s husband for the Assessment year 2025-26 with reasons.

5. Mr. B is the Karta of a HUF, whose members derive income as given below:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(i) Income from B' s profession|45,000|
|(ii) Mrs. B' s salary as fashion designer|76,000|
|(iii) Minor son D (interest on fixed deposits with a bank which were gifted to him by his uncle)|10,000|
|(iv) Minor daughter P's earnings from sports|95,000|
|(v) D's winnings from lottery (gross)|1,95,000|

Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. and Mrs. B.

# ANSWERS

1. As per section 64(1A), in computing the total income of an individual, all such income accruing or arising to a minor child shall be included. However, income of a minor child suffering from disability specified under section 80U would not be included in the income of the parent but would be taxable in the hands of the minor child. Therefore, in this case, the income of daughter suffering from disability specified under section 80U should not be clubbed with the income of Mr. Sharma.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.26 INCOME TAX LAW

Under section 10(32), income of each minor child includible in the hands of the parent under section 64(1A) would be exempt to the extent of the actual income or ` 1,500, whichever is lower. Mr. Sharma would be eligible for exemption u/s 10(32) since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The remaining income would be included in the hands of the parent.

# Computation of income earned by minor children to be clubbed with the income of Mr. Sharma

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(i) Income of one daughter|9,000|
|Less: Income exempt under section 10(32)|1,500|
|Total (A)|7,500|
|(ii) Income of two sons (` 6,200 + ` 4,300)|10,500|
|Less: Income exempt under section 10(32) (` 1,500 + ` 1,500)|3,000|
|Total (B)|7,500|
|Total Income to be clubbed as per section 64(1A) (A+B)|15,000|

Note: It has been assumed that:

1. The income does not accrue or arise to the minor children on account of any manual work done by them or activity involving application of their skill, talent or specialized knowledge and experience;
2. The income of Mr. Sharma, before including the minor children’s income, is greater than the income of Mrs. Sharma, due to which the income of the minor children would be included in his hands; and
3. This is the first year in which clubbing provisions are attracted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED

# 4.27 IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

# 2. Computation of total income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor son for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|Mr. A (`)|Mrs. A (`)|Minor Son (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Income under the head “Salaries”| | | |
|Salary income (of Mrs. A)|-|2,40,000|-|
|Pension income (of Mr. A) (` 10,000×12)|1,20,000|-|-|
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)|50,000|50,000| |
| |70,000|1,90,000| |
|Income from House Property [See Note (3) below]|52,000|-|-|
|Income from other sources| | | |
|Interest on Mr. A’s fixed deposit with Bank of India (` 5,00,000×9%) [See Note (1) below]|45,000|-|-|
|Commission received by Mrs. A from a partnership firm, in which Mr. A has substantial interest [See Note (2) below]|-|25,000|70,000|
|Income before including income of minor son under section 64(1A)|1,92,000|1,90,000|-|
|Income of the minor son from the investment made in the business out of the amount gifted by Mr. A [See Note (4) below]|18,500|-|-|

# 4.28 INCOME TAX LAW

|Income of the minor son|-|-|20,000|
|---|---|---|---|
|through a business activity involving application of his skill and talent [See Note (5) below]| | | |
|Total Income|2,10,500|1,90,000|20,000|

# Notes:

1. As per section 60, in case there is a transfer of income without transfer of asset from which such income is derived, such income shall be treated as income of the transferor. Therefore, the fixed deposit interest of ` 45,000 transferred by Mr. A to Mr. B shall be included in the total income of Mr. A.
2. As per section 64(1)(ii), in case the spouse of the individual receives any amount by way of income from any concern in which the individual has substantial interest (i.e. holding shares carrying at least 20% voting power or entitled to at least 20% of the profits of the concern), then, such income shall be included in the total income of the individual. The only exception is in a case where the spouse possesses any technical or professional qualifications and the income earned is solely attributable to the application of her technical or professional knowledge and experience, in which case, the clubbing provisions would not apply. In this case, the commission income of ` 25,000 received by Mrs. A from the partnership firm has to be included in the total income of Mr. A, as Mrs. A does not possess any technical or professional qualification for earning such commission and Mr. A has substantial interest in the partnership firm as he holds 75% profit share in the firm.
3. According to section 27(i), an individual who transfers any house property to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with an agreement to live apart, shall be deemed to be the owner of the house property so transferred. Hence, Mr. A shall be deemed to be the owner of the flat gifted to
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

Mrs. A and hence, the income arising from the same shall be computed in the hands of Mr. A.

Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of Mrs. A, since she has received immovable property without consideration from a relative i.e., her husband.

# (4)

As per section 64(1A), the income of the minor child is to be included in the total income of the parent whose total income (excluding the income of minor child to be so clubbed) is greater. Further, as per section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in the income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per child.

Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 received by minor son from the investment made out of the sum gifted by Mr. A shall, after providing for exemption of ` 1,500 under section 10(32), be included in the income of Mr. A, since Mr. A’s income of ` 1,92,000 (before including the income of the minor child) is greater than Mrs. A’s income of ` 1,90,000. Therefore, ` 18,500 (i.e., ` 20,000 – ` 1,500) shall be included in Mr. A’s income. It is assumed that this is the first year in which clubbing provisions are attracted.

Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of the minor son, since he has received a sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 without consideration from a relative i.e., his father.

# (5)

In case the income earned by the minor child is on account of any activity involving application of any skill or talent, then, such income of the minor child shall not be included in the income of the parent but shall be taxable in the hands of the minor child.

Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 derived by Mr. A’s minor son through a business activity involving application of his skill and talent shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent. Such income shall be taxable in the hands of the minor son.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.30 INCOME TAX LAW

3. As per section 27(i), an individual who transfers otherwise than for adequate consideration any house property to his spouse, not being a transfer in connection with an agreement to live apart, shall be deemed to be the owner of the house property so transferred. Therefore, in this case, Mr. A would be the deemed owner of the house property transferred to his wife Mrs. B without consideration.

As per section 64(1)(vi), income arising to the son’s wife from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to her by an individual otherwise than for adequate consideration would be included in the total income of such individual.

Income from let-out property is ` 2,10,000 [i.e., ` 3,00,000, being the actual rent calculated at ` 25,000 per month less ` 90,000, being deduction under section 24@30% of ` 3,00,000]

In this case, income of ` 2,10,000 from let-out property arising to Mrs. C, being Mr. A’s son’s wife, would be included in the income of Mr. A, applying the provisions of section 27(i) and section 64(1)(vi). Such income would, therefore, not be taxable in the hands of Mrs. C.

In case the property was gifted to Mr. A’s son, the clubbing provisions under section 64 would not apply, since the son is not a minor child. Therefore, the income of ` 2,10,000 from letting out of property gifted to the son would be taxable in the hands of the son.

It may be noted that the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of the recipient of house property, since the receipt of property in each case was from a “relative” of such individual. Therefore, the stamp duty value of house property would not be chargeable to tax in the hands of the recipient of immovable property, even though the house property was received by her or him without consideration.

Note - The first part of the question can also be answered by applying the provisions of section 64(1)(vi) directly to include the income of ` 2,10,000 arising to Mrs. C in the hands of Mr. A. [without first applying the provisions of section 27(i) to deem Mr. A as the owner of the house property transferred to his wife Mrs. B without consideration], since section 64(1)(vi) speaks of clubbing of income arising to son’s wife from indirect transfer of assets to her by her.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

husband’s parent, without consideration. Gift of house property by Mr. A to Mrs. C, via Mrs. B, can be viewed as an indirect transfer by Mr. A to Mrs. C.

# 4.

Section 64(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of income in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the assets transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case Smt. Rani received a gift of ` 2,00,000 from her husband which she invested in her business. The income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani’s husband for A.Y.2025-26 is computed as under:

|Particulars|Smt. Rani’s Capital Contribution|Capital Out of gift from husband|Total|
|---|---|---|---|
|Capital as at 1.4.2023|3,00,000|-|3,00,000|
|Investment on 10.04.2023 out of gift received from her husband|2,00,000|2,00,000| |
| |3,00,000|2,00,000|5,00,000|
|Profit for F.Y. 2023-24 to be apportioned on the basis of capital employed on the first day of the previous year i.e., on 1.4.2023|1,50,000| |1,50,000|
|Capital employed as at 1.4.2024|4,50,000|2,00,000|6,50,000|
|Profit for F.Y.2024-25 to be apportioned on the basis of capital employed as at 1.4.2024 (i.e., 45 : 20)|2,70,000|1,20,000|3,90,000|

Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani’s husband for A.Y.2025-26 is ` 1,20,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4.32 INCOME TAX LAW

# 5. Clubbing of income and other tax implications

As per the provisions of section 64(1A), in case the marriage of the parents subsist, the income of a minor child shall be clubbed in the hands of the parent whose total income, excluding the income of the minor child to be clubbed, is greater. In this problem, it has been assumed that the marriage of Mr. B and Mrs. B subsists.

Further, in case the income arises to the minor child on account of any manual work done by the child or as a result of any activity involving application of skill, talent, specialized knowledge or experience of the child, then, the same shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent.

# Tax implications

1. Income of ` 45,000 from Mr. B’s profession shall be taxable in the hands of Mr. B under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
2. Salary of ` 1,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under section 16(ia) of ` 75,000) shall be taxable as “Salaries” in the hands of Mrs. B. However, if Mrs. B exercises the option of shifting out of default tax regime, salary of ` 26,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under section 16(ia) of ` 50,000) shall be taxable as “Salaries”.
3. Income from fixed deposit of ` 10,000 arising to the minor son D, shall be clubbed in the hands of the father, Mr. B as “Income from other sources”, since Mr. B’s income is greater than income of Mrs. B before including the income of the minor child. As per section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in the income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per child if such parent exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The balance income would be clubbed in the hands of the parent as “Income from other sources”.
4. Income of ` 95,000 arising to the minor daughter P from sports shall not be included in the hands of the parent, since such income has arisen to the minor daughter on account of an activity involving application of her skill.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

(v) Income of ₹ 1,95,000 arising to minor son D from lottery shall be included in the hands of Mr. B as “Income from other sources”, since Mr. B’s income is greater than the income of Mrs. B before including the income of minor child.

Note – Mr. B can reduce the tax deducted at source from such lottery income while computing his net tax liability.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 5

# 5.1 AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to –

- identify the permissible inter-source and inter-head adjustments;
- identify the restrictions to inter-source and inter-head set-off of losses;
- comprehend the conditions to be satisfied for carry forward and set-off of losses under different heads;
- state the maximum period for which different losses can be carried forward;
- comprehend and arrange the order of set-off of losses;
- apply the above provisions to arrive at the total income of an assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 5.2

maximum 8 AYs for set-off against long-term capital gains carried forward for maximum 4 AYs for set-off against maximum 8 AYs for set-off against profits and gains from

Unabsorbed loss from speculation business can be maximum 4 AYs for set-off against income from the

Unabsorbed business loss can be carried forward for maintaining race horses can be carried forward for

Unabsorbed loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses

Short-term capital loss can be carried forward for

Long-term capital loss can be carried forward for maximum 8 AYs for set-off against capital gains

# Carry forward and Set-off of unabsorbed losses

income from speculation business

business or profession

regime under section 115BAC

property cannot be

Following brought forward losses/ depreciation is not allowed to be set off while computing total income

Loss from house

from the activity of owning set off against

racehorses cannot be set-off against income under any other head

# Inter-head adjustment

osses under default

and maintaining

any other head

3. Brought forward business loss on account of deduction u/s 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii) or u/s 35(2AA)

# Exceptions

“Capital gains” cannot

Loss under the head

income under any other head.

4. Unabsorbed depreciation attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia).

be set-off against

business or profession” against income under

Loss under the head

“Profits and gains of

the head “Salaries” cannot be set off

# Inter-source set-off of losses under the same head of income

OVERVIEW

f

Loss from the activity of owning and

Long term capital

tax regime under section 115BAC

loss

# Exceptions

o

Set

# CHAPTER

speculative business

Loss from

under default

-

Note
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# 5.3

maximum 8 AYs for set-off against long-term capital gains

forward for maximum 8 AYs for set-off against income

carried forward for maximum 4 AYs for set-off against

maximum 8 AYs for set-off against profits and gains from

Unabsorbed loss from specified business under section

Unabsorbed loss from house property can be carried

35AD can be carried forward for indefinite period for set-

maximum 4 AYs for set-off against income from the

Unabsorbed loss from speculation business can be

Unabsorbed business loss can be carried forward for maintaining race horses can be carried forward for

Unabsorbed loss from the activity of owning and

activity of owning and maintaining race horses

Short-term capital loss can be carried forward for

Long-term capital loss can be carried forward for

maximum 8 AYs for set-off against capital gains

off against profit from any specified business

# Carry forward and Set-off of unabsorbed losses

income from speculation business

business or profession

from house property

under normal provisions of the Act

property can be set off

any other head only to

against income under

Speculation loss, loss from

Loss from house

cannot be set-off against

the extent of

maintaining race horses

35AD and loss from the

specified business u/s

2 lakhs

# Inter-head adjustment

et off of losses

# Exceptions

head

gains” cannot be set-off against

income under any other head.

S

Loss under the head “Capital

arry forward &

business or profession”

against income under

under the head

“Profits and gains of

the head “Salaries”

cannot be set off

# C

off and Inter-source set-off of losses under the same head of income

Loss

Set

Loss from the activity of owning and

Long term capital

maintaining race horses

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

# Exceptions

loss

Loss from specified business u/s

35AD

speculative business

Loss from
# 5.4 INCOME TAX LAW

# 1. AGGREGATION OF INCOME

In certain cases, some amounts are deemed as income in the hands of the assessee though they are actually not in the nature of income. These cases are contained in sections 68, 69, 69A, 69B, 69C and 69D. These are discussed in detail in Chapter 1. The Assessing Officer may require the assessee to furnish explanation in such cases.

If the assessee does not offer any explanation or the explanation offered by the assessee is not satisfactory, the amounts referred to in these sections would be deemed to be the income of the assessee. Such amounts have to be aggregated with the assessee’s income.

# 2. CONCEPT OF SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

Specific provisions have been made in the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the set-off and carry forward of losses. In simple words, “Set-off” means adjustment of losses against the profits from another source/head of income in the same assessment year. If losses cannot be set-off in the same year due to inadequacy of eligible profits, then such losses are carried forward to the next assessment year for adjustment against the eligible profits of that year. The maximum period for which different losses can be carried forward for set-off has been provided in the Act.

# 3. INTER SOURCE ADJUSTMENT [SECTION 70]

(i) Inter-source set-off of losses: Under this section, the losses incurred by the assessee in respect of one source shall be set-off against income from any other source under the same head of income, since the income under each head is to be computed by grouping together the net result of the activities of all the sources covered by that head. In simpler terms, loss from one source of income can be adjusted against income from another source, both the sources being under the same head.

Example 1: Loss from one house property can be set off against the income from another house property.
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

Example 2: Loss from one business, say textiles, can be set off against income from any other business, say printing, in the same year as both these sources of income fall under one head of income. Therefore, the loss in one business may be set-off against the profits from another business in the same year.

# (ii) Impermissible inter-source set-off:

Inter-source set-off, however, is not permissible in the following cases -

- (a) Long-term capital loss [Section 70(3)]
Short-term capital loss is allowed to be set off against both short-term capital gain and long-term capital gain. However, long-term capital loss can be set-off only against long-term capital gain and not against short-term capital gain.
- (b) Speculation loss [Section 73(1)]
A loss in speculation business can be set-off only against the profits of any other speculation business and not against any other business or professional income. However, losses from other business can be adjusted against profits from speculation business.
- (c) Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses [Section 74A(3)]
Such loss can be set-off only against income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses.
- (d) Losses from Specified business [Section 73A(1)]
In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), loss in any specified business referred in section 35AD can be set-off only against any other specified business. However, losses from other business can be set-off against profits from specified business.

Loss from an exempt source cannot be set-off against income from a taxable source of income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.6 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4. INTER HEAD ADJUSTMENT [SECTION 71]

Loss under one head of income can be adjusted or set off against income under another head. However, the following points should be considered:

1. Loss under any head other than capital gains: Where the net result of the computation under any head of income (other than “Capital Gains”) is a loss, the assessee can set-off such loss against his income assessable for that assessment year under any other head, including “Capital Gains”.
2. Loss under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”: Where the net result of the computation under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” is a loss, such loss cannot be set off against income under the head “Salaries”. It shall be allowed to set off from income under any other head except “Salaries”.
3. Loss under the head “Capital Gains”: Where the net result of computation under the head ‘Capital Gains’ is a loss, whether short term or long term, such capital loss cannot be set-off against income under any other head.
4. Loss under the head “Income from house property”: The loss under the head “Income from house property” would not be allowable to be set-off against income under the other head if the assessee pays tax at concessional rate u/s 115BAC. However, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and there is a loss under the head “Income from house property” and the assessee has income assessable under any other head of income, the maximum loss from house property which can be set-off against income from any other head is ` 2 lakhs. In other words, in such case, the amount of such loss exceeding ` 2 lakhs would not be allowable to be set-off against income under the other head.
5. Speculation loss and loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses: cannot be set off against income under any other head.
6. Losses from Specified business u/s 35AD: In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), loss from specified business referred to in section 35AD can be set off only against income from any other specified business. Such loss cannot be set off against income under any other head.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

If the income from a source is exempt from tax, loss from that exempt source cannot be set off against taxable income from a different source or taxable income under a different head.

# 5. CARRY FORWARD & SET-OFF OF LOSS FROM HOUSE PROPERTY [SECTION 71B]

1. Set-off and Carry Forward & Set-off of losses
1. If the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A): In any assessment year, if there is a loss under the head “Income from house property”, such loss will first be set-off against income from any other head to the extent of ` 2,00,000 during the same year. The unabsorbed loss will be carried forward to the following assessment year to be set-off against income under the head “Income from house property”.
2. If the assessee pays tax at concessional rate u/s 115BAC: The loss under the head “Income from house property” would not be allowable to be set-off against income under any other head. The unabsorbed loss cannot be carried forward to the following assessment year.
2. Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: The loss under the head “Income from house property” is allowed to be carried forward up to 8 assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year in which the loss was first computed. Once a particular loss is carried forward, it can be set off only against the income from the same head in the forthcoming assessment years.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. A, aged 35 years, submits the following particulars pertaining to the A.Y.2025-26:

|Particulars|`| |
|---|---|---|
|Income from salary (computed)|4,00,000| |
|Loss from let-out property|(-)|2,20,000|

# 5.8 INCOME TAX LAW

Business loss                                                    (-)1,00,000

Bank interest (FD) received                                           80,000

Compute the total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming that

1. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. He pays tax under the default tax regime.

# SOLUTION

# (i) Computation of total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Income from salary|4,00,000| |
|Less: Loss from house property of ` 2,20,000 to be restricted to ` 2 lakhs by virtue of section 71(3A)|(-)|2,00,000|
|Balance loss of ` 20,000 from house property to be carried forward to next assessment year| | |
|Income from other sources (interest on fixed deposit with bank)|80,000| |
|Less: Business loss of ` 1,00,000 set-off to the extent of ` 80,000|(-)|80,000|
|Business loss of ` 20,000 to be carried forward for set-off against business income of the next assessment year| | |
|Gross total income [See Note below]| |2,00,000|
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A| |Nil|
|Total income| |2,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# Notes:

(i) Gross Total Income includes salary income of ` 2,00,000 after adjusting loss of ` 2,00,000 from house property. The balance loss of ` 20,000 from house property to be carried forward to next assessment year for set-off against income from house property of that year.

(ii) Business loss of ` 1,00,000 is set off against bank interest of ` 80,000 and remaining business loss of ` 20,000 will be carried forward as it cannot be set off against salary income.

# (ii) Computation of total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Income from salary|4,00,000| |
|Income from other sources (interest on fixed deposit with bank)|80,000| |
|Less: Business loss of ` 1,00,000 set-off to the extent of ` 80,000|(-)|80,000|
|Business loss of ` 20,000 to be carried forward for set-off against business income of the next assessment year| | |
|Gross total income/ Total Income|4,00,000| |

# Notes:

(i) Under the default tax regime, loss from house property of ` 2,20,000 cannot be set off against income under any other head and cannot be carried forward to next assessment year.

(ii) Business loss of ` 1,00,000 is set off against bank interest of ` 80,000 and remaining business loss of ` 20,000 will be carried forward as it cannot be set off against salary income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.10 INCOME TAX LAW

# 6. CARRY FORWARD AND SET-OFF OF BUSINESS LOSSES [SECTIONS 72]

Under the Act, the assessee has the right to carry forward the loss from business and profession in cases where such loss cannot be set-off due to the absence or inadequacy of income under any other head in the same year. The loss so carried forward can be set-off against the profits of subsequent previous years.

Section 72 covers the carry forward and set-off of losses arising from a business or profession.

# Conditions

The assessee’s right to carry forward business losses under this section is, however, subject to the following conditions:

1. The loss should have been incurred in business, profession or vocation.
2. The loss should not be in the nature of a loss in the business of speculation.
3. Loss from one business can be carried forward & set-off against the income from any other business: The loss may be carried forward and set-off against the income from business or profession though not necessarily against the profits and gains of the same business or profession in which the loss was incurred. However, a loss carried forward cannot, under any circumstances, be set-off against the income from any head other than “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
4. Person who incurred the loss alone is entitled to carry forward & set-off the loss: The loss can be carried forward and set off only against the profits of the assessee who incurred the loss. That is, only the person who has incurred the loss is entitled to carry forward & set off the same. Consequently, the successor of a business cannot carry forward & set off the losses of his predecessor except in the case of succession by inheritance.
5. Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: A business loss can be carried forward for a maximum period of 8 assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year in which the loss was incurred.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. B, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars for the P.Y.2024-25:

|Particulars|Amount (`)|
|---|---|
|Income from salary (computed)|45,000|
|Income from house property|(24,000)|
|Income from non-speculative business|(22,000)|
|Income from speculative business|(4,000)|
|Short-term capital losses|(25,000)|
|Long-term capital gains taxable u/s 112|19,000|

What is the total income chargeable to tax for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming that he pays tax under section 115BAC?

# SOLUTION

Total income of Mr. B for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|Amount (`)|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Income from salaries|45,000| |
|Income from house property|Nil| |
|Loss from house property can neither be set-off nor can be carried forward, since Mr. B is paying tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC| | |
|Profits and gains of business and profession| | |
|Business loss to be carried forward [Note (i)]|(22,000)| |
|Speculative loss to be carried forward [Note (ii)]|(4,000)| |
|Capital Gains| | |
|Long term capital gain taxable u/s 112|19,000| |
|Short term capital loss ` 25,000 set off against long-term capital gains to the extent of ` 19,000 [Note (iii)]|(19,000)| |
| |Nil| |
|Balance short term capital loss of ` 6,000 to be carried forward [Note (iii)]| | |
|Taxable income|45,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.12 INCOME TAX LAW

Notes:

1. Business loss cannot be set-off against salary income. Therefore, loss of ` 22,000 from the non-speculative business cannot be set off against the income from salaries. Hence, such loss has to be carried forward to the next year for set-off against business profits, if any.
2. Loss of ` 4,000 from the speculative business can be set off only against the income from the speculative business. Hence, such loss has to be carried forward.
3. Short term capital loss can be set off against both short term capital gain and long-term capital gain. Therefore, short-term capital loss of ` 25,000 can be set-off against long-term capital gains to the extent of ` 19,000. The balance short term capital loss of ` 6,000 cannot be set-off against any other income and has to be carried forward to the next year for set-off against capital gains, if any.

# 7. LOSSES IN SPECULATION BUSINESS [SECTION 73]

The meaning of the expression ‘speculative transaction’ as defined in section 43(5) and the treatment of income from speculation business has already been discussed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

(i) Set-off and carry forward & set-off of loss from speculation business: Since speculation is deemed to be a business distinct and separate from any other business carried on by the assessee, the losses incurred in speculation business can neither be set off in the same year against any other non-speculation income nor be carried forward and set off against other income in the subsequent years.

Therefore, if the losses sustained by an assessee in a speculation business cannot be set-off in the same year against any other speculation profit, they can be carried forward to subsequent years and set-off only against income from any speculation business carried on by the assessee. Loss from the activity of trading in derivatives, however, is not to be treated as speculative loss.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# 5.13

# (ii)

Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: The loss in speculation business can be carried forward only for a maximum period of 4 years from the end of the relevant assessment year in respect of which the loss was computed.

# (iii)

When a business of a company deemed to be carrying on a speculation business: The Explanation to this section provides that where any part of the business of a company consists in the purchase and sale of the shares of other companies, such company shall be deemed to be carrying on speculation business to the extent to which the business consists of the purchase and sale of such shares.

However, this deeming provision does not apply to the following companies –

1. A company whose gross total income consists of mainly income chargeable under the heads “Interest on securities”, “Income from house property”, “Capital gains” and “Income from other sources”;
2. A company, the principal business of which is –

Thus, these companies would be exempted from the operation of this Explanation. Accordingly, if these companies carry on the business of purchase and sale of shares of other companies, they would not be deemed to be carrying on speculation business.

# CARRY FORWARD & SET OFF OF LOSSES OF SPECIFIED BUSINESSES [SECTION 73A]

# (i)

Set-off and Carry forward & set-off of losses of specified business: An assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and carrying on specified business, can claim deduction u/s 35AD in respect of capital expenditure (other than land, goodwill and financial instruments) incurred in respect of such business, subject to fulfillment of specified conditions. Any loss computed in respect of the specified business referred to in section 35AD can, however, be set off.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.14 INCOME TAX LAW

only against profits and gains, if any, of any other specified business. The unabsorbed loss, if any, will be carried forward for set off against profits and gains of any specified business in the following assessment year and so on.

(ii) Loss can be set-off indefinitely: There is no time limit specified for carry forward and set-off and therefore, such loss can be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against income from specified business.

Under the optional tax regime, the loss of an assessee claiming deduction under section 35AD in respect of a specified business can be set-off against the profit of another specified business under section 73A, irrespective of whether the latter is eligible for deduction under section 35AD. An assessee can, therefore, set-off the losses of a hospital or hotel which begins to operate after 1st April, 2010 and which is eligible for deduction under section 35AD, against the profits of the existing business of operating a hospital (with at least 100 beds for patients) or a hotel (of two-star or above category), even if the latter is not eligible for deduction under section 35AD.

# 9. LOSSES UNDER THE HEAD ‘CAPITAL GAINS’ [SECTION 74]

Carry forward & set-off of losses: Section 74 provides that where, for any assessment year, the net result under the head ‘Capital gains’ is short term capital loss or long-term capital loss, the loss shall be carried forward to the following assessment year to be set off in the following manner:

(i) Short-term capital loss: Where the loss so carried forward is a short-term capital loss, it shall be set off against any capital gains, short term or long term, arising in that year.

(ii) Long-term capital loss: Where the loss so carried forward is a long-term capital loss, it shall be set off only against long term capital gain arising in that year.

(iii) Loss under head capital gains: Net loss under the head capital gains cannot be set off against income under any other head.

(iv) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of loss: Any unabsorbed loss shall be carried forward to the following assessment year up to a maximum

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

of 8 assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year for which the loss was first computed.

Long-term capital gain exceeding ` 1,25,000 arising on sale of equity shares or units of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid

- in respect of equity shares, both at the time of acquisition and sale and
- in respect of units of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust, at the time of sale

is taxable under section 112A @10% or 12.5%, as the case may be. Long-term capital loss on sale of such shares/units can, therefore, be set-off and carried forward for set-off against long-term capital gains by virtue of section 70(3) and section 74.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

During the P.Y. 2024-25, Mr. C has the following income and the brought forward losses:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Short term capital gains on sale of shares|1,50,000|
|Long term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24|(96,000)|
|Short term capital loss of A.Y.2024-25|(37,000)|
|Long term capital gain u/s 112|75,000|

What is the capital gain taxable in the hands of Mr. C for the A.Y.2025-26?

# SOLUTION

Taxable capital gains of Mr. C for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Short term capital gains on sale of shares|1,50,000| |
|Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss of the A.Y.2024-25|(37,000)|1,13,000|
|Long term capital gain|75,000| |
|Less: Brought forward long-term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24 ` 96,000 set off to the extent of ` 75,000|(75,000)|Nil|
|[See Note below]| | |
|Taxable short-term capital gains|1,13,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.16 INCOME TAX LAW

Note: Long-term capital loss cannot be set off against short-term capital gain. Hence, the unadjusted long-term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24 of ` 21,000 (i.e. ` 96,000 – ` 75,000) can be carried forward to the next year to be set-off against long-term capital gains of that year.

# 10. LOSSES FROM THE ACTIVITY OF OWNING AND MAINTAINING RACE HORSES [SECTION 74A(3)]

(i) Set-off and Carry forward & set-off of loss: According to the provisions of section 74A(3), the losses incurred by an assessee from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses cannot be set-off against the income from any other source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses.

(ii) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years for being set-off against the income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses in the subsequent years.

(iii) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Amount of loss incurred by the assessee in the activity of owning and maintaining racehorses|(i) In case assessee has no income by way of stake money – Amount of revenue expenditure incurred by the assessee wholly & exclusively for the purpose of maintaining race horses.|
| |(ii) In case assessee has income by way of stake money - The amount by which such income by way of stake money falls short of the amount of revenue expenditure incurred by the assessee wholly & exclusively for the purpose of maintaining race horses. i.e., Loss = Stake money – revenue expenditure for the purpose of maintaining race horses.|
|Horse race|A horse race upon which wagering or betting may be lawfully made.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

Income by way of stake money The gross amount of prize money received on a race horse or race horses by the owner thereof on account of the horse or horses or anyone or more of the horses winning or being placed second or in any lower position in horse races.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. D has the following income for the P.Y.2024-25:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from the activity of owning and maintaining the race horses|75,000|
|Income from textile business|85,000|
|Brought forward textile business loss (relating to A.Y. 2024-25)|50,000|
|Brought forward loss from the activity of owning and maintaining the race horses (relating to A.Y.2022-23)|96,000|

What is the total income in the hands of Mr. D for the A.Y. 2025-26?

# SOLUTION

Total income of Mr. D for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses|75,000| |
|Less: Brought forward loss of ` 96,000 from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses set-off to the extent of ` 75,000|75,000|Nil|
|Balance loss of ` 21,000 (`96,000 – `75,000) from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27| | |
|Income from textile business|85,000| |
|Less: Brought forward business loss from textile business|50,000|35,000|
|Total income| |35,000|

Note: Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses cannot be set-off against any other source/head of income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.18 INCOME TAX LAW

# 11. ORDER OF SET-OFF OF LOSSES

As per the provisions of section 72(2), brought forward business loss is to be set-off before setting off unabsorbed depreciation. Therefore, the order in which set-off will be effected is as follows -

1. Current year depreciation [Section 32(1)];
2. Current year capital expenditure on scientific research and current year expenditure on family planning, to the extent allowed.
3. Brought forward loss from business/profession [Section 72(1)];
4. Unabsorbed depreciation [Section 32(2)];
5. Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research [Section 35(4)];
6. Unabsorbed expenditure on family planning [Section 36(1)(ix)].

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Mr. E has furnished his details for the A.Y.2025-26 as under:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from salaries (computed)|1,50,000|
|Income from speculation business|60,000|
|Loss from non-speculation business|(40,000)|
|Short term capital gain|80,000|
|Long term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24|(30,000)|
|Winning from lotteries (Gross)|20,000|

# Compute the total income of Mr. E for the A.Y.2025-26.

# SOLUTION

Computation of total income of Mr. E for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from salaries|1,50,000| |
|Income from speculation business|60,000| |
|Less : Loss from non-speculation business|(40,000)|20,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.19 AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

|Short-term capital gain|80,000|
|---|---|
|Winnings from lotteries|20,000|
|Taxable income|2,70,000|

Note: Long term capital loss can be set off only against long term capital gain. Therefore, long term capital loss of ` 30,000 has to be carried forward to the next assessment year.

# 12. SUBMISSION OF RETURN OF LOSSES [SECTION 80]

As per section 80,

- business loss under section 72(1),
- speculation business loss under section 73(2),
- loss from specified business under section 73A(2), in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A),
- loss under the head “Capital Gains” under section 74(1) and
- loss from activity of owning and maintaining race horses under section 74A(3),

which has not been determined in pursuance of a return filed under section 139(3) can not be carried forward and set-off. Thus, the assessee must have filed a return of loss under section 139(3) in order to carry forward and set off of such losses. Such a return of loss should be filed within the time allowed under section 139(1).

This condition does not apply to a loss from house property carried forward under section 71B and unabsorbed depreciation carried forward under section 32(2).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.20 INCOME TAX LAW

# Let Us Recapitulate

# Inter-source and Inter-head set-off of losses [Sections 70 & 71]

|Section|Provision|Exceptions|
|---|---|---|
|70|Inter-source set-off of losses under the same head of income|(i) Loss from speculation business can be set-off only against profits from another speculation business. (ii) Long term capital loss (LTCL) can be set-off only against Long term capital gains (LTCG). (iii) Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses can be set-off only against income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. (iv) An assessee carrying on specified business u/s 35AD and exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), would be eligible for deduction u/s 35AD. In such a case, loss from specified business under section 35AD can be set-off only against profits from any other specified business.|
|71|Inter head adjustment|(i) Loss under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” cannot be set off against income under the head “Salaries”. (ii) Loss under the head “Capital gains” cannot be set-off against income under any other head.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

For example, business loss can be set-off against income from house property.

(iii) Speculation loss and loss from the activity of owning and maintaining racehorses cannot be set-off against income under any other head.

(iv) In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and claiming deduction u/s 35AD, loss from specified business u/s 35AD cannot be set off against income under any other head.

(v) The loss under the head “Income from house property” would not be allowable to be set-off against income under the other head and cannot be carried forward if the assessee pays tax at concessional rate u/s 115BAC. However, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), loss from house property can be set-off against income under any other head only to the extent of ` 2 lakhs. The remaining loss can be carried forward for set-off against income from house property of the succeeding year(s).

# Losses which cannot be set-off or carried forward

- Loss from gambling, betting, card games etc.
- Loss from an exempt source [for example, share of loss of partnership firm cannot be set-off against any other business income]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.22 INCOME TAX LAW

# Maximum period of carry forward of losses & Manner of set-off of brought forward losses

|Section|Nature of loss to be carried forward|Income against which the brought forward loss can be set-off|Maximum period [from the end of the relevant assessment year] for carry forward of losses|
|---|---|---|---|
|32(2)|Unabsorbed depreciation|Income under any head other than salaries|Indefinite period|
|71B|Unabsorbed loss from house property|Income from house property|8 assessment years|
|72|Unabsorbed business loss|Profits and gains from business or profession|8 assessment years|
|73|Loss from speculation business|Income from any speculation business|4 assessment years|
|73A|Loss from specified business u/s 35AD, in case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|Profit from any specified business, irrespective of whether such business is eligible for deduction u/s 35AD.|Indefinite period|
|74|Long-term capital loss|Long-term capital gains|8 assessment years|
| |Short-term capital loss|Short-term/Long-term capital gains|8 assessment years|
|74A|Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses|Income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses.|4 assessment years|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# Order of set-off of losses

1. Current year depreciation / Current year capital expenditure on scientific research and current year expenditure on family planning, to the extent allowed.
2. Brought forward loss from business/profession [Section 72(1)]
3. Unabsorbed depreciation [Section 32(2)]
4. Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research [Section 35(4)].
5. Unabsorbed expenditure on family planning [Section 36(1)(ix)]

Note - As per section 80, filing of loss return under section 139(3) within the due date specified under section 139(1) is mandatory for carry forward of the above losses except loss from house property and unabsorbed depreciation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.24 INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

# 1.

Compute the gross total income of Mr. F for the A.Y. 2025-26 from the information given below –

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from house property (computed)|1,25,000|
|Income from business (before providing for depreciation)|1,35,000|
|Short term capital gains on sale of unlisted shares|56,000|
|Long term capital loss from sale of property (brought forward from A.Y. 2024-25)|(90,000)|
|Income from tea business|1,20,000|
|Dividends from Indian companies carrying on agricultural operations (Gross)|80,000|
|Current year depreciation|26,000|
|Brought forward business loss (loss incurred six years ago)|(45,000)|

# 2.

Mr. Soohan submits the following details of his income for the A.Y.2025-26:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from salary (computed)|3,00,000|
|Loss from let out house property|(- 40,000)|
|Income from sugar business|50,000|
|Loss from iron ore business for P.Y. 2019-20 (discontinued in P.Y. 2020-21)|(- 1,20,000)|
|Short term capital loss|(- 60,000)|
|Long term capital gain|40,000|
|Dividend|5,000|
|Income received from lottery winning (Gross)|50,000|
|Winnings from card games (Gross)|6,000|
|Agricultural income|20,000|
|Short-term capital loss under section 111A|(- 10,000)|
|Bank interest on Fixed deposit|5,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

Calculate gross total income and losses to be carried forward, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 3. Mr. Batra furnishes the following details for year ended 31.03.2025:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Short term capital gain|1,40,000|
|Loss from speculative business|60,000|
|Long term capital gain on sale of land|30,000|
|Long term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares|1,00,000|
|Income from business of textile (after allowing current year depreciation)|50,000|
|Income from activity of owning and maintaining race horses|15,000|
|Income from salary (computed)|1,00,000|
|Loss from house property|40,000|

Following are the brought forward losses:

- (i) Losses from activity of owning and maintaining race horses-pertaining to A.Y.2022-23 - ` 25,000.
- (ii) Brought forward loss from business of textile ` 60,000 - Loss pertains to A.Y. 2017-18.

Compute gross total income of Mr. Batra for the Assessment Year 2025-26, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Also determine the losses eligible for carry forward to the A.Y. 2026-27.

# 4. Mr. A furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.03.2025:

|Particulars|(`)|
|---|---|
|(i) Income from plying of vehicles (computed as per books) (He owned 5 light goods vehicle throughout the year)|3,20,000|
|(ii) Income from retail trade of garments (Computed as per books)|7,50,000|
| |(Sales turnover ` 1,35,70,000)|

Mr. A had declared income on presumptive basis under

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.26 INCOME TAX LAW

section 44AD for the first time in A.Y.2025-26. Assume 10% of the turnover during the P.Y.2024-25 was received in cash and balance through A/c payee cheque and all the payments in respect of expenditure were also made through A/c payee cheque or debit card.

(iii) He has brought forward depreciation relating to 1,00,000 A.Y. 2023-24

Compute taxable income of Mr. A and his tax liability for the A.Y. 2025-26 with reasons for your computation, assuming that he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 5. Mr. Aditya furnishes the following details for the year ended 31-03-2025:

|Particulars|Amount (`)|
|---|---|
|Loss from speculative business A|25,000|
|Income from speculative business B|5,000|
|Loss from specified business covered under section 35AD|20,000|
|Income from salary (computed)|3,00,000|
|Loss from let out house property|2,50,000|
|Income from trading business|45,000|
|Long-term capital gain from sale of urban land|2,00,000|
|Long-term capital loss on sale of shares (STT not paid)|75,000|
|Long-term capital loss on sale of listed shares in recognized stock exchange (STT paid at the time of acquisition and sale of shares)|1,02,000|

Following are the brought forward losses:

1. Losses from owning and maintaining of race horses pertaining to A.Y. 2023-24 ` 2,000.
2. Brought forward loss from trading business ` 5,000 relating to A.Y.2020-21.

Compute the total income of Mr. Aditya and show the items eligible for carry forward, assuming that he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.27 AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# 6.

Mr. Garg, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars of his income and other details for the P.Y. 2024-25.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(1) Income from Salary (computed)|15,000|
|(2) Income from business|66,000|
|(3) Long term capital gain on sale of land|10,800|
|(4) Loss on maintenance of race horses|15,000|
|(5) Loss from gambling|9,100|

The other details of unabsorbed depreciation and brought forward losses pertaining to A.Y. 2024-25 are as follows:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(1) Unabsorbed depreciation|11,000|
|(2) Loss from Speculative business|22,000|
|(3) Short term capital loss|9,800|

Compute the Gross total income of Mr. Garg for the A.Y. 2025-26 and the amount of loss, if any that can be carried forward or not.

# 7.

The following are the details relating to Mr. Srivatsan, a resident Indian, aged 57, relating to the year ended 31.3.2025:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from salaries (computed)|2,20,000|
|Loss from house property|1,90,000|
|Loss from cloth business|2,40,000|
|Income from speculation business|30,000|
|Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD|20,000|
|Long-term capital gains from sale of urban land|2,50,000|
|Loss from card games|32,000|
|Income from betting (Gross)|45,000|
|Life Insurance Premium paid (10% of the capital sum assured)|45,000|

# 5.28 INCOME TAX LAW

Compute the total income and show the items eligible for carry forward, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 8.

Mr. Rajat submits the following information for the financial year ending 31st March, 2025. He decides to pay tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC. He desires that you should:

- (a) Compute the total income; and
- (b) Ascertain the amount of losses that can be carried forward.

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(i) He has two let out house property:| |
|(a) House No. I – Income after all statutory deductions|72,000|
|(b) House No. II – Current year loss|(30,000)|
|(ii) He has three proprietary businesses:| |
|(a) Textile Business:| |
|(i) Discontinued from 31st October, 2024 – Current year loss|(40,000)|
|(ii) Brought forward business loss of A.Y.2020-21|95,000|
|(b) Chemical Business:| |
|(i) Discontinued from 1st March, 2022 – hence no profit/loss|Nil|
|(ii) Bad debts allowed in earlier years recovered during this year|35,000|
|(iii) Brought forward business loss of A.Y. 2021-22|50,000|
|(c) Leather Business: Profit for the current year|1,00,000|
|(d) Share of profit in a firm in which he is partner since 2009|16,550|
|(iii) (a) Short-term capital gain|60,000|
|(b) Long-term capital loss|(35,000)|
|(iv) Contribution to LIC towards premium|10,000|

# 9.

Ms. Geeta, a resident individual, provides the following details of her income/ losses for the year ended 31.3.2025:

(i) Salary received as a partner from a partnership firm ` 7,50,000. The same was allowed to the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

(ii) Loss on sale of shares listed in BSE ` 3,00,000. Shares were held for 15 months and STT paid on sale and acquisition.

(iii) Long-term capital gain on sale of land ` 5,00,000.

(iv) ` 51,000 received in cash from friends in party.

(v) ` 55,000, being dividend income on listed equity shares of domestic companies.

(vi) Brought forward business loss of A.Y. 2023-24 ` 12,50,000.

Compute gross total income of Ms. Geeta for the A.Y. 2025-26 and ascertain the amount of loss that can be carried forward.

# 10. Mr. P, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars of his income and other details for the previous year 2024-25:

|Sl. No.|Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Income from salary (computed)|18,000|
|(ii)|Net annual value of house property|70,000|
|(iii)|Income from business|80,000|
|(iv)|Income from speculative business|12,000|
|(v)|Long term capital gain on sale of land|15,800|
|(vi)|Loss on maintenance of race horse|9,000|
|(vii)|Loss on gambling|8,000|

Depreciation allowable under the Income-tax Act, 1961, comes to ` 8,000, for which no treatment is given above.

The other details of unabsorbed depreciation and brought forward losses (pertaining to A.Y. 2023-24) are:

|Sl. No.|Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Unabsorbed depreciation|9,000|
|(ii)|Loss from speculative business|16,000|
|(iii)|Short term capital loss|7,800|

Compute the gross total income of Mr. P for the A.Y. 2025-26, and the amount of loss that can or cannot be carried forward.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.30 INCOME TAX LAW

# ANSWERS

# 1. Gross Total Income of Mr. F for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from house property (Computed)|1,25,000| |
|Income from business| | |
|Profits before depreciation|1,35,000| |
|Less: Current year depreciation|26,000| |
|Less: Brought forward business loss|45,000| |
| |64,000| |
|Income from tea business (40% is business income)|48,000|1,12,000|
|Capital gains| | |
|Short-term capital gains|56,000| |
|Income from Other Sources| | |
|Dividend income (taxable in the hands of shareholders)|80,000| |
|Gross Total Income|3,73,000| |

# Notes:

1. Dividend from Indian companies is taxable at normal rates of tax in the hands of resident shareholders.
2. 60% of the income from tea business is treated as agricultural income and therefore, exempt from tax;
3. Long-term capital loss can be set-off only against long-term capital gains. Therefore, long-term capital loss of ` 90,000 brought forward from A.Y.2024-25 cannot be set-off in the A.Y.2025-26, since there is no long-term capital gains in that year. It has to be carried forward for set-off against long-term capital gains, if any, during A.Y.2026-27.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# 2. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Soohan for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries| | |
|Income from salary|3,00,000| |
|Less: Loss from house property set-off against salary income as per section 71|(40,000)|2,60,000|
|Profits and gains of business or profession| | |
|Income from sugar business|50,000| |
|Less: Brought forward loss of ` 1,20,000 from iron-ore business set-off as per section 72(1) to the extent of ` 50,000|(50,000)|Nil|
|Balance business loss of ` 70,000 of P.Y.2019-20 to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27| | |
|Capital gains| | |
|Long term capital gain|40,000| |
|Less: Short term capital loss of ` 60,000 set-off to the extent of ` 40,000|(40,000)|Nil|
|Balance short-term capital loss of ` 20,000 to be carried forward| | |
|Short-term capital loss of ` 10,000 u/s 111A also to be carried forward| | |
|Income from other sources| | |
|Dividend (fully taxable in the hands of shareholders)|5,000| |
|Winnings from lottery|50,000| |
|Winnings from card games|6,000| |
|Bank FD interest|5,000|66,000|
|Gross Total Income| |3,26,000|

# Losses to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27

|Loss of iron-ore business (` 1,20,000 – ` 50,000)|70,000|
|---|---|
|Short term capital loss (` 20,000 + ` 10,000)|30,000|

Note: Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.32 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Batra for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries|1,00,000| |
|Less: Current year loss from house property|(40,000)|60,000|
|Profit and gains of business or profession| | |
|Income from textile business|50,000| |
|Less: Loss of ` 60,000 from textile business b/f from A.Y. 2017-18 set-off to the extent of ` 50,000 [See Note 1]|50,000|NIL|
|Income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses|15,000| |
|Less: Loss of ` 25,000 from activity of owning and maintaining race horses b/f from A.Y. 2022-23 set-off to the extent of ` 15,000|15,000|NIL|
|Balance loss of ` 10,000 to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27 [See Note 2]| | |
|Capital Gain| | |
|Short term capital gain|1,40,000| |
|Long term capital gain on sale of land|30,000| |
|Less: Long term capital loss of ` 1,00,000 on sale of unlisted shares set-off to the extent of ` 30,000|30,000|NIL|
|Balance loss of ` 70,000 to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27 [See Note 3]| | |
|Gross Total Income|2,00,000| |

# Losses to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Current year loss from speculative business [See Note-4]|60,000|
|Current year long term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares|70,000|
|Loss from activity of owning and maintaining of race horse pertaining to A.Y.2022-23|10,000|

# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

Notes: -

1. As per section 72(3), business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of eight assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year for which the loss was first computed. Since the eight year period for carry forward of business loss of A.Y. 2017-18 expired in the A.Y. 2025-26, the balance unabsorbed business loss of ` 10,000 cannot be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27.
2. As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred on maintenance of race horses cannot be set-off against income from any source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years.
3. Long-term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares can be set-off against long-term capital gain on sale of land. The balance loss of ` 70,000 cannot be set-off against short term capital gain or against any other head of income. The same has to be carried forward for set-off against long-term capital gain of the subsequent assessment year. Such long-term capital loss can be carried forward for a maximum of eight assessment years.
4. Loss from speculation business cannot be set-off against any income other than profit and gains of another speculation business. Such loss can, however, be carried forward for a maximum of four years as per section 73(4) to be set-off against income from speculation business.

# 4. Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from retail trade – as per books (See Note 1 below)|7,50,000|
|Income from plying of vehicles – as per books (See Note 2 below)|3,20,000|
| |10,70,000|
|Less : Set off of b/f depreciation relating to A.Y. 2023-24|1,00,000|
|Total income|9,70,000|
|Tax liability|1,06,500|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|4,260|
|Total tax liability|1,10,760|

# 5.34 INCOME TAX LAW

Note:

1. Income from retail trade: Presumptive business income under section 44AD is ` 8,41,340 i.e., 8% of ` 13,57,000, being 10% of the turnover received in cash and 6% of ` 1,22,13,000, being the amount of sales turnover received through A/c payee cheque. However, the income computed as per books is ` 7,50,000 which is to be further reduced by the amount of unabsorbed depreciation of ` 1,00,000. Since the income computed as per books is lower than the income deemed under section 44AD, the assessee can adopt the income as per books. However, if he does not declare profits as per presumptive taxation under section 44AD, he has to get his books of accounts audited under section 44AB, since his turnover exceeds ` 1 crore (the enhanced limit of ` 10 crore would not be available, since more than 5% of the turnover is received in cash). Also, his case would be falling under section 44AD(4) and hence, tax audit is mandatory. It may further be noted that he cannot declare income under presumptive provisions under section 44AD for next five assessment years, if he does not declare profits as per presumptive provisions under section 44AD this year.
2. Income from plying of light goods vehicles: Income calculated under section 44AE(1) would be ` 7,500 x 12 x 5 which is equal to ` 4,50,000. However, the income from plying of vehicles as per books is ` 3,20,000, which is lower than the presumptive income of ` 4,50,000 calculated as per section 44AE(1). Hence, the assessee can adopt the income as per books i.e. ` 3,20,000, provided he maintains books of account as per section 44AA and gets his accounts audited and furnishes an audit report as required under section 44AB.

It is to be further noted that in both the above cases, if income is declared under presumptive provisions, all deductions under sections 30 to 38, including depreciation would have been deemed to have been given full effect to and no further deduction under those sections would be allowable. If income is declared as per presumptive provisions, his total income would be as under:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from retail trade under section 44AD [` 13,57,000@ 8,41,340 8% plus ` 1,22,13,000 @6%]|8,41,340|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

|Income from plying of light goods vehicles under section|4,50,000|
|---|---|
|[` 7,500 x 12 x 5]|12,91,340|
|Less: Set off of brought forward depreciation – not possible as it is deemed that it has been allowed and set off|Nil|
|Total income|12,91,340|
|Tax thereon|1,99,902|
|Add : Health and Education cess @4%|7,996|
|Total tax liability|2,07,898|
|Total tax liability (rounded off)|2,07,900|

# 5. Computation of total income of Mr. Aditya for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries| | |
|Income from Salary|3,00,000| |
|Less: Loss from house property set-off against salary income as per section 71(3A)|2,00,000|1,00,000|
|Loss from house property to the extent not set off i.e. ` 50,000 (` 2,50,000 – ` 2,00,000) to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27| | |
|Profits and gains of business or profession| | |
|Income from trading business|45,000| |
|Less: Brought forward loss from trading business of A.Y. 2020-21 can be set off against current year income from trading business as per section 72(1), since the eight year time limit as specified under section 72(3), within which set-off is permitted, has not expired.|5,000|40,000|
|Income from speculative business B|5,000| |
|Less: Loss of ` 25,000 from speculative business A set-off as per section 73(1) to the extent of ` 5,000|5,000|Nil|
|Balance loss of ` 20,000 from speculative business A to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27 as per section 73(2)| | |

# 5.36 INCOME TAX LAW

Loss of ` 20,000 from specified business covered under section 35AD to be carried forward for set-off against income from specified business as per section 73A.

# Capital Gains

|Long term capital gain on sale of urban land|2,00,000| |
|---|---|---|
|Less: Long term capital loss on sale of shares (STT not paid) set-off as per section 74(1)|75,000| |
|Less: Long-term capital loss on sale of listed shares on which STT is paid can also be set-off as per section 74(1), since long-term capital arising on sale of such shares is taxable under section 112A|1,02,000|23,000|
|Total Income|1,63,000| |

# Items eligible for carried forward to A.Y.2026-27

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Loss from House property|50,000|

As per section 71(3A), loss from house property can be set-off against any other head of income to the extent of ` 2,00,000 since Mr. Aditya is exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

As per section 71B, balance loss not set-off can be carried forward to the next year for set-off against income from house property of that year. It can be carried forward for a maximum of eight assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2033-34, in this case.

|Loss from speculative business A|20,000|
|---|---|
|Loss from speculative business can be set-off only against profits from any other speculation business. As per section 73(2), balance loss not set-off can be carried forward to the next year for set-off against speculative business income of that year. Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2029-30, in this case, as specified under section 73(4).| |
|Loss from specified business|20,000|
|Loss from specified business under section 35AD can be set-off only against profits of any other specified business. If loss cannot be so set-off, the same has to be carried forward to the next year.| |

# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

subsequent year for set off against income from specified business, if any, in that year. As per section 73A(2), such loss can be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of any specified business.

Mr. Aditya is entitled to deduction u/s 35AD, since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). He can, accordingly, carry forward loss from such business indefinitely for set off against profits of any other specified business.

Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses 2,000

Losses from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses (current year or brought forward) can be set-off only against income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. If it cannot be so set-off, it has to be carried forward to the next year for set-off against income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses, if any, in that year. It can be carried forward for a maximum of four assessment years, i.e., upto A.Y.2027-28, in this case, as specified under section 74A(3).

# 6. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Garg for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|(i) Income from salary|15,000| |
|(ii) Profits and gains of business or profession|66,000| |
|Less: Unabsorbed depreciation brought forward from A.Y.2024-25 (Unabsorbed depreciation can be set-off against any head of income other than “salary”)|11,000|55,000|
|(iii) Capital gains| | |
|Long-term capital gain on sale of land|10,800| |
|Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss [Short-term capital loss can be set-off against both short-term capital gains and long-term capital gains as per section 74(1)]|9,800|1,000|
|Gross Total Income| |71,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.38 INCOME TAX LAW

# Amount of loss to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|(1) Loss from speculative business [to be carried forward as per section 73]|22,000|
|[Loss from a speculative business can be set off only against income from another speculative business. Since there is no income from speculative business in the current year, the entire loss of ₹ 22,000 brought forward from A.Y.2024-25 has to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27 for set-off against speculative business income of that year. It may be noted that speculative business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four years as per section 73(4), i.e., upto A.Y.2028-29]|[Loss from a speculative business can be set off only against income from another speculative business. Since there is no income from speculative business in the current year, the entire loss of ₹ 22,000 brought forward from A.Y.2024-25 has to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27 for set-off against speculative business income of that year. It may be noted that speculative business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four years as per section 73(4), i.e., upto A.Y.2028-29]|
|(2) Loss on maintenance of race horses [to be carried forward as per section 74A]|15,000|
|[As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred in the activity of owning and maintaining race horses in any assessment year cannot be set-off against income from any other source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2029-30]|[As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred in the activity of owning and maintaining race horses in any assessment year cannot be set-off against income from any other source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2029-30]|
|(3) Loss from gambling can neither be set-off nor be carried forward.| |

# 7. Computation of total income of Mr. Srivatsan for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|Net Amount (₹)|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries|Income from salaries|2,20,000|
|Less: Loss from house property since Mr. Srivatsan has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)|1,90,000|30,000|
|Profits and gains of business or profession|Income from speculation business|30,000|
|Less: Loss from cloth business of ₹ 2,40,000 set off to the extent of ₹ 30,000|30,000|Nil|

# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# Capital gains

|Long-term capital gains from sale of urban land|2,50,000|
|---|---|
|Less: Set-off of balance loss of ` 2,10,000 from cloth business|2,10,000|
|Income from other sources| |
|Income from betting|45,000|
|Gross Total Income|1,15,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 80C (life insurance premium paid) [See Note (iv) below]|30,000|
|Total income|85,000|

# Losses to be carried forward:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|(1) Loss from cloth business (` 2,40,000 – ` 30,000 – ` 2,10,000)|Nil|
|(2) Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD|20,000|

# Notes:

1. Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD can be set-off only against profits and gains of any other specified business. Therefore, such loss cannot be set off against any other income. The unabsorbed loss has to be carried forward for set-off against profits and gains of any specified business in the following year. Mr. Srivatsan is entitled to deduction u/s 35AD, since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Therefore, he can carry forward loss of ` 20,000 from specified business referred u/s 35AD indefinitely for set off against profits of any specified business.
2. Business loss cannot be set off against salary income. However, the balance business loss of ` 2,10,000 (` 2,40,000 – ` 30,000 set-off against income from speculation business) can be set-off against long-term capital gains of ` 2,50,000 from sale of urban land. Consequently, the taxable long-term capital gains would be ` 40,000.
3. Loss from card games can neither be set off against any other income, nor can be carried forward.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 5.40 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) For providing deduction under Chapter VI-A, gross total income has to be reduced by the amount of long-term capital gains and casual income. Therefore, the deduction under section 80C in respect of life insurance premium of ` 45,000 paid has to be restricted to ` 30,000 [i.e., Gross Total Income of ` 1,15,000 – ` 40,000 (LTCG) – ` 45,000 (Casual income)]. Mr. Srivatsan is entitled to deduction u/s 80C, since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(v) Income from betting is chargeable at a flat rate of 30% under section 115BB and no expenditure or allowance can be allowed as deduction from such income, nor can any loss be set-off against such income.

# 8. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajat for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|1. Income from house property| | |
|House No.1|72,000| |
|House No.2|(-)|30,000|
| | |42,000|
|2. Profits and gains of business or profession| | |
|Profit from leather business|1,00,000| |
|Bad debts recovered taxable under section 41(4)|35,000| |
| | |1,35,000|
|Less: Current year loss of textile business|(-)|40,000|
| | |95,000|
|Less: Brought forward business loss of textile business for A.Y.2020-21 set off against the business income of current year|(-)|95,000|
| | |Nil|
|3. Capital Gains| | |
|Short-term capital gain| |60,000|
|Gross Total Income| |1,02,000|
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A| | |
|Under section 80C – LIC premium paid|-|(not available since he is paying tax under the default tax regime)|
|Total Income| |1,02,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# Statement of losses to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Brought forward chemical business loss of A.Y. 2021-22 to be carried forward u/s 72|50,000|
|Long term capital loss of A.Y. 2025-26 to be carried forward u/s 74|35,000|

# Notes:

1. Share of profit from firm of ₹ 16,550 is exempt under section 10(2A).
2. Long-term capital loss cannot be set-off against short-term capital gains. Therefore, it has to be carried forward to the next year to be set-off against long-term capital gains of that year.

# Computation of Gross Total Income of Ms. Geeta for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business and profession| |
|Salary received as a partner from a partnership firm is taxable under the head “Profits and gains of business and profession”|7,50,000|
|Less: B/f business loss of A.Y. 2023-24 ₹ 12,50,000 to be set-off to the extent of ₹ 7,50,000|7,50,000|
| |Nil|
|(Balance b/f business loss of ₹ 5,00,000 can be carried forward to the next year)| |
|Capital Gains| |
|Long term capital gain on sale of land|5,00,000|
|Less: Long-term capital loss on shares on STT paid (See Note 2 below)|3,00,000|
| |2,00,000|
|Income from other sources| |
|Cash gift received from friends - since the value of cash gift exceeds ₹ 50,000, the entire sum is taxable|51,000|
|Dividend income from a domestic company is fully taxable in the hands of shareholders|55,000|
|Gross Total Income|3,06,000|

# 5.42 INCOME TAX LAW

# Notes:

1. Balance brought forward business loss of assessment year 2023-24 of ` 5,00,000 has to be carried forward to the next year.
2. Long-term capital loss on sale of shares on which STT is paid at the time of acquisition and sale can be set-off against long-term capital gain on sale of land since long-term capital gain on sale of shares (STT paid) is taxable under section 112A. Therefore, it can be set-off against long-term capital gain on sale of land as per section 70(3).

# 10. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. P for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|(i) Income from salary|18,000| |
|(ii) Income from House Property| | |
|Net Annual Value|70,000| |
|Less: Deduction under section 24 (30% of ` 70,000)|21,000|49,000|
|(iii) Income from business and profession| | |
|(a) Income from business|80,000| |
|Less : Current year depreciation|8,000|72,000|
|Less : Unabsorbed depreciation|9,000|63,000|
|(b) Income from speculative business|12,000| |
|Less : B/f loss of ` 16,000 from speculative business set-off to the extent of ` 12,000|12,000|Nil|
|(Balance loss of ` 4,000 (i.e. ` 16,000 – ` 12,000) can be carried forward to the next year)|(Balance loss of ` 4,000 (i.e. ` 16,000 – ` 12,000) can be carried forward to the next year)|(Balance loss of ` 4,000 (i.e. ` 16,000 – ` 12,000) can be carried forward to the next year)|
|(iv) Income from capital gain| | |
|Long-term capital gain on sale of land|15,800| |
|Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss|7,800|8,000|
|Gross total income| |1,38,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES

# 5.43

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Loss from speculative business (to be carried forward as per section 73)|4,000|
|Loss on maintenance of race horses (to be carried forward as per section 74A)|9,000|

# Notes:

1. Loss on gambling can neither be set-off nor be carried forward.
2. As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred on maintenance of race horses cannot be set-off against income from any other source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years.
3. Brought forward speculative business loss can be set off only against income from speculative business of the current year and the balance loss can be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27. It may be noted that speculative business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four years as per section 73(4).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 6

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to –

- appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income under the default tax regime under section 115BAC;
- appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income, if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and is paying tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act;
- identify the assessees eligible for deduction under various sections;
- compute deductions in respect of payments, applying the provisions under the relevant sections;
- compute deductions in respect of certain income, applying the provisions under the relevant sections;
- compute the deduction allowable in the case of a person with disability;
- compute the deduction available under section 10AA for units established in SEZs considering the conditions specified thereunder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 6.2

# Deductions

Other optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act) section 80JJAA would be available if the deposits in case of senior citizens under the under section 10AA In respect of interest on deposits.

In respect of employment of new employees Deduction in case of a person with disability.

Deductions in respect of other certain books other than text books.

# Deductions from Gross Total Income

In respect of royalty income etc. In respect of royalty on patents on loan borrowed for acquisition of house property by an individual.

# Deduction

Section 80U [Employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government].

Section 80TTA Section 80TTB t paid for medical treatment etc. of specified disease or ailment.

In respect of maintenance including medical treatment of a dependent disabled.

Interest payable on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle.

Section 80JJAA Section 80QQB Section 80RRB.

Deductions in respect of certain regime In respect of donations for scientific research and rural development.

In respect of contributions given by any person to political parties.

In respect of donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc.

In respect of interest on loan taken for higher education.

Contribution to certain pension funds In respect of contributions given by companies to.

Contribution to pension scheme of In respect of contribution to Agnipath scheme.

In respect of medical insurance premium payable.

A pays tax at concessional rates of tax u/s 115BAC under Chapter VI.

In respect of LIP, PPF, PF etc. interest of Central Government In respect of rent paid.

In respect of contribution to u/s 80CCD(2).

In respect of deductions in respect of certain payments.

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

In respect of am.

Section 80DDB Section 80CCH Section 80CCD Section 80GGA Section 80GGB Section 80CCC Section 80EEB Section 80GGC Section 80DD Section 80GG Section 80C Section 80EE Section 80D Section 80G Section 80E.

Only d Government.

Note.
# 6 DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

The various items of income referred to in the different clauses of section 10 are excluded from the total income of an assessee. These incomes are known as exempted incomes. “Exemption” means exclusion. A particular income exempt from tax under section 10 shall not enter into the computation of taxable income. However, there are certain items of income referred to in section 10 which are not exempted if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC, namely,

- 10(5) Leave travel concession
- 10(13A) House Rent Allowance
- 10(14) Special Allowances except -
- (a) Travelling allowance
- (b) Daily allowance
- (c) Conveyance allowance
- (d) Transport allowance to blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee
- 10(17) Daily allowance/Constituency allowance received by any Member of Parliament or of State Legislatures
- 10(32) Exemption in respect of income of minor child included in assessee’s total income

“Deduction” in relation to Chapter VI-A and section 10AA refers to the amount that is reduced from gross total income to arrive at the total income. There are incomes which are included in gross total income but are wholly or partly allowed as deduction under Chapter VI-A in computation of total income, if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and pays tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal provisions of the Act.

Deduction is allowed on specific investments or expenses incurred by the taxpayer to promote the culture of savings and investments. This could include medical expenditure, donations made to charities, investments made in specific avenues such as Public Provident Fund (PPF), National Pension Scheme (NPS) etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 4 INCOME TAX LAW

However, if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC, only deduction in respect of employer’s contribution to NPS u/s 80CCD(2), Central Government’s contribution to Agnipath Scheme u/s 80CCH(2) and deduction in respect of employment of new employees u/s 80JJAA would be allowed to the assessee. He cannot claim deduction under any other provision in Chapter VI-A under the default tax regime.

Section 10AA also provides for a deduction in respect of units established in SEZ from the total income of the assessee. It is available only if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). This deduction is not available if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

The tax liability is calculated on the “total income” which is arrived after reducing permissible deductions from gross total income.

Students should note this very important difference between exemption under section 10 and the deduction under Chapter VI-A/10AA.

# Difference between Deduction under Chapter VI-A & section 10AA and Exemption under section 10

|Particulars|Deduction (in relation to Chapter VI-A and section 10AA)|Exemption (contained in section 10)|
|---|---|---|
|Meaning|Investments/ contributions in certain instruments (as prescribed under the Income-tax Act). Payments made for certain purposes.|The incomes which are exempt under section 10 will not be included in computing gross total income.|
|Relevant Sections|80C to 80U in Chapter VI-A and section 10AA of the Income-tax Act.|Section 10 of the Income-tax Act.|
|Manner of treatment|First included in the Gross Total Income and then deductions will be allowed from Gross Total Income.|Not included in the Gross Total Income.|

The important point to be noted here is that if there is no gross total income, then no deductions will be permissible. This Chapter contains deduction under Chapter VI-A which includes deductions in respect of certain payments, deductions in
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.5

In respect of certain incomes, deductions in respect of other income and other deductions. It also includes deduction under section 10AA.

# Section 80A

1. Section 80A(1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee, there shall be allowed from his gross total income, the deductions specified in sections 80C to 80U if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. According to section 80A(2), the aggregate amount of the deductions under this chapter shall not, in any case, exceed the gross total income of the assessee. Therefore, the total income after deductions will either be positive or nil. It cannot be negative due to deductions. An assessee cannot have a loss as a result of the deduction under Chapter VI-A and claim to carry forward the same for the purpose of set-off against his income in the subsequent year.
3. Section 80A(3) provides that in the case of AOP/BOI exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), if any deduction is admissible under section 80G/80GGA/80GGC1, no deduction under the same section shall be made in computing the total income of a member of the AOP or BOI in relation to the share of such member in the income of the AOP or BOI.
4. The profits and gains allowed as deduction under section 10AA or under any provision of Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes" in any assessment year, shall not be allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act for such assessment year [Section 80A(4)].
5. The deduction, referred to in (iv) above, shall not exceed the profits and gains of the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business, as the case may be [Section 80A(4)].

180-IA/80-IB/80-IE (these sections will be dealt with at the Final level)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6. INCOME TAX LAW

(vi) No deduction under any of the provisions referred to in (iv) above, shall be allowed if the deduction has not been claimed in the return of income [Section 80A(5)].

(vii) The transfer price of goods and services between such undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business and any other business of the assessee shall be determined at the market value of such goods or services as on the date of transfer [Section 80A(6)].

(viii) For this purpose, the expression "market value" has been defined to mean, -

- (a) in relation to any goods or services sold or supplied, the price that such goods or services would fetch if these were sold by the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business in the open market, subject to statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;
- (b) in relation to any goods or services acquired, the price that such goods or services would cost if these were acquired by the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business from the open market, subject to statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;

(ix) Where a deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes” is claimed and allowed to an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), in respect of the profits of such specified business for any assessment year, no deduction under section 35AD is permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or any other assessment year.

In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction under section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business, he cannot claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes” for the same or any other year and vice versa. Further, if the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, neither deduction under section 35AD nor deductions under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes” would be available to him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.7

# Section 80AB

Deductions specified in Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes”, shall be allowed only to the extent such income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is included in the gross total income of the assessee.

# Section 80AC: Furnishing return of income on or before due date mandatory for claiming deduction under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”

(i) Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), as a pre-condition for availing benefit of deductions under any provision of Chapter VI-A under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”.

# Table showing the deductions contained in Chapter VI-A under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain income”

|Section|Deduction|
|---|---|
|80-IA|Deductions in respect of profits and gains from undertakings or enterprises engaged in infrastructure development/ operation/ maintenance, generation/ transmission/ distribution of power etc.|
|80-IAB|Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an undertaking or enterprise engaged in development of SEZ|
|80-IAC|Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an eligible start-up from an eligible business|
|80-IB|Deduction in respect of profits and gains from certain industrial undertakings other than infrastructure development undertakings|
|80-IBA|Deduction in respect of profits and gains from housing projects/rental housing projects|
|80-IE|Deduction in respect of profits and gains from manufacture or production of eligible article or thing, substantial expansion to manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing or carrying on of eligible business in North-Eastern States|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.

# INCOME TAX LAW

|80JJA|Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of collecting and processing of bio-degradable waste|
|---|---|
|80JJAA|Deduction in respect of employment of new employees|
|80LA|Deduction in respect of certain income of Offshore Banking Units and International Financial Services Centre|
|80M|Deduction in respect of certain inter-corporate dividends|
|80P|Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies|
|80PA|Deduction in respect of certain income of Producer Companies|
|80QQB|Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain books other than text books|
|80RRB|Deduction in respect of royalty on patents|

(ii) The effect of this provision is that, in case of failure to file return of income on or before the stipulated due date, the undertakings would lose the benefit of deduction under these sections.

Note: The deductions under section 80-IA to 80-IE, 80JJA, 80LA, 80M, 80P and 80PA in respect of certain incomes will be dealt with in detail at the Final Level.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:

- (a) For grant of deduction under section 80JJAA, filing of audit report in prescribed form is must for a corporate assessee; filing of return within the due date laid down in section 139(1) is not required.
- (b) Filing of belated return under section 139(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will debar an assessee from claiming deduction under section 80 QQB if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) (i.e., he pays tax under the optional tax regime).

# SOLUTION

(a) The statement is not correct. Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), as a pre-condition for availing the benefit of deduction, inter alia, under section 80JJAA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.9

(b) The statement is correct. As per section 80AC, the assessee has to furnish his return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), to be eligible to claim deduction under, inter alia, section 80QQB.

Section 80B(5) “Gross total income” means the total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act without making any deduction under Chapter VI-A.

“Computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act” implies—

1. that deductions under appropriate computation section have already been given effect to;
2. that income of other persons, if includible under sections 60 to 64, has been included;
3. the intra head and/or inter head losses have been adjusted; and
4. that unabsorbed brought forward business losses, unabsorbed depreciation etc., have been set-off.

Two types of deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA which are discussed in this chapter.

# Deductions from Gross Total Income

|Deductions under Chapter VI-A| | | |Other|Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1. Deductions in respect of certain payments|2. Deductions in respect of certain incomes|3. Deductions in respect of other incomes|4. Deductions under section 10AA| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.10 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN PAYMENTS

# 2.1 Deduction in respect of investment in specified assets

[Section 80C]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Deduction in respect of investment/ contributions

Section 80C provides for a deduction from the Gross Total Income of savings in specified modes of investments. The deduction under section 80C is available only to an individual or HUF exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

The maximum permissible deduction under section 80C is ` 1,50,000. The following are the investments/ contributions eligible for deduction –

1. Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual for participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971. In case of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any member.
2. Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual for participation in any Unit linked Insurance Plan of the LIC Mutual Fund. In case of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any member.
3. Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy
Premium paid on insurance on the life of the individual, spouse or any child (minor or major) and in the case of HUF, any member thereof. This will include a life policy and an endowment policy.

The following is a tabular summary of the deduction allowable under section 80C vis-à-vis the date of issue of such policies –
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.11 Deduction u/s 80C

In respect of Premium paid to the extent of 20% of “actual capital sum assured” before 31.3.2012.

In respect of Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual capital sum assured” i.e., minimum amount assured under the policy on happening of the insured event at any time but before 1.4.2013 –

- (i) the value of any premium agreed to be returned; or
- (ii) any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and above the sum actually assured, which is to be or may be received under the policy by any person.

In respect of

1. (a) Where the insurance is on the life of a person with disability or severe disability as referred to in section 80U or a person suffering from disease or ailment as specified under section 80DDB. Premium paid to the extent of 15% of “actual capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as described above].
2. (b) Where the insurance is on the life of any person, other than mentioned in (a) above. Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as described above].

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Compute the eligible deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26 in respect of life insurance premium paid by Mr. Ganesh during the P.Y.2024-25, the details of which are given hereunder, if Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# 12 INCOME TAX LAW

|Date of issue of policy|Person insured|Actual capital sum assured (`)|Insurance premium paid during 2024-25 (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) 30/3/2012|Self|9,00,000|48,000|
|(ii) 1/5/2018|Spouse|1,50,000|20,000|
|(iii) 1/6/2021|Handicapped son (section 80U disability)|4,00,000|80,000|

# SOLUTION

|Date of issue of policy|Person insured|Actual capital sum assured (`)|Insurance premium paid during 2024-25 (`)|Deduction u/s 80C (restricted to % of sum assured) (`)|Remark|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(i) 30/3/2012|Self|9,00,000|48,000|48,000|20%|
|(ii) 1/5/2018|Spouse|1,50,000|20,000|15,000|10%|
|(iii) 1/6/2021|Handicapped son (section 80U disability)|4,00,000|80,000|60,000|15%|

Total: 1,23,000

# ILLUSTRATION 3

What would your answer if Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC?

# SOLUTION

If Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, he would not be eligible for deduction under section 80C.

# (4) Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity

Premium paid to effect and keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of the individual and/or his or her spouse or any child, provided such contract does not contain any provision for the exercise by the insured of an option to receive cash payments in lieu of the payment of the annuity.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

It is pertinent to note here that a contract for a deferred annuity need not necessarily be with an insurance company. It follows therefore that such a contract can be entered into with any person.

# (5) Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government employee

Amount deducted by or on behalf of the Government from the salary of a Government employee in accordance with the conditions of his service for securing a deferred annuity or making provision for his spouse or children. The excess, if any, over one-fifth of the salary is to be ignored.

# (6) Contribution to SPF/PPF/RPF

Contributions to any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925 applies and recognized provident fund qualifies for deduction under section 80C. Contribution made to any Provident Fund set up by the Central Government and notified in his behalf (i.e., the Public Provident Fund established under the Public Provident Fund Scheme, 1968) also qualifies for deduction under section 80C. Such contribution can be made in the name of the individual, his spouse and any child of the individual; and any member of the family, in case of a HUF. The maximum limit for deposit in PPF is ` 1,50,000 in a year.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

An individual assessee, resident in India, has made the following deposit/payment during the previous year 2024-25:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Contribution to the public provident fund|1,50,000|
|Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse (policy taken on 1.4.2018) (Assured value ` 2,20,000)|25,000|

What is the deduction allowable under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26 if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.14 INCOME TAX LAW

# SOLUTION

# Computation of deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Deposit in public provident fund|1,50,000|
|Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse (Maximum 10% of the assured value ₹ 2,20,000, as the policy is taken after 31.3.2012)|22,000|
|Total|1,72,000|

However, the maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C is 1,50,000 restricted to

# (7) Contribution to approved superannuation Fund

Contribution by an employee to an approved superannuation fund qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

# (8) Any sum paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account

Subscription to any such security of the Central Government or any such deposit scheme as the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette. Accordingly, Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme has been notified to provide that any sum paid or deposited during the previous year in the said Scheme, by an individual in the name of –

- (a) any girl child of the individual; or
- (b) any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian

would be eligible for deduction under section 80C.

# Exemption on payment from Sukanya Samriddhi Account [Section 10(11A)]

Section 10(11A) provides that any payment from an account opened in accordance with the Sukanya Samriddhi Account Rules, 2014, made under the Government Savings Bank Act, 1873, shall not be included in the total income of the assessee. Accordingly, the interest accruing on deposits in, and withdrawals from any account under the said scheme would be exempt.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.15

1. Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII

Subscription to any Savings Certificates under the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959 notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette (i.e. National Savings Certificate (VIII Issue) issued under the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959).
2. Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC

Contributions to approved annuity plans of LIC (New Jeevan Dhara and New Jeevan Akshay, New Jeevan Dhara I and New Jeevan Akshay I, II and III) or any other insurer as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
3. Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI

Subscription to any units of any mutual fund or from the Administrator or the specified company under any plan formulated in accordance with such scheme notified by the Central Government;
4. Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI

Contribution by an individual to a pension fund set up by any Mutual Fund or by the Administrator or the specified company as the Central Government may specify (i.e., UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund set up by the specified company referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 as a pension fund).
5. Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit Scheme, 2008

Subscription to any deposit scheme or contribution to any pension fund set up by the National Housing Bank i.e., National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit Scheme, 2008.
6. Subscription to notified deposit scheme

Subscription to any such deposit scheme of
- a public sector company which is engaged in providing long-term finance for construction, or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# 16 INCOME TAX LAW

• any such deposit scheme of any authority constituted in India by or under any law enacted either for the purpose of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages or for both.

The deposit scheme should be notified by the Central Government, for example, public deposit scheme of HUDCO.

# (15) Payment of tuition fees to any university, college, school or other educational institution within India for full-time education for maximum 2 children

Payment of tuition fees by an individual assessee at the time of admission or thereafter to any university, college, school or other educational institutions within India for the purpose of full-time education of any two children of the individual. This benefit is only for the amount of tuition fees for full-time education and shall not include any payment towards development fees or donation or payment of similar nature and payment made for education to any institution situated outside India.

# (16) Repayment of housing loan including stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses

Any payment made towards the cost of purchase or construction of a new residential house property. The income from such property –

1. should be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”;
2. would have been chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property” had it not been used for the assessee’s own residence.

The approved types of payments are as follows:

- Any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-financing or other schemes of any development authority, Housing Board or other authority engaged in the construction and sale of house property on ownership basis; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.17

(b) Any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or a cooperative society of which the assessee is a shareholder or member towards the cost of house allotted to him; or

(c) Repayment of amount borrowed by the assessee from:

1. The Central Government or any State Government;
2. Any bank including a co-operative bank;
3. The Life Insurance Corporation;
4. The National Housing Bank;
5. Any public company formed and registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes which is eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(viii);
6. Any company in which the public are substantially interested or any cooperative society engaged in the business of financing the construction of houses;
7. The assessee’s employer, where such employer is an authority or a board or a corporation or any other body established or constituted under a Central or State Act;
8. The assessee’s employer where such employer is a public company or public sector company or a university established by law or a college affiliated to such university or a local authority or a co-operative society.

(d) Stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the purposes of a transfer of such house property to the assessee.

# Inadmissible payments:

However, the following amounts do not qualify for rebate:

1. Admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a shareholder of a company or a member of a co-operative society has to pay for becoming a shareholder or member; or
2. The cost of any addition or alteration or renovation or repair of the house property after the issue of the completion certificate in respect of the house property or after the house has been occupied by the assessee or any person on his behalf or after it has been let out; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# 18 INCOME TAX LAW

# (C)

any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under section 24.

# (17) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures

Subscription to equity shares or debentures forming part of any eligible issue of capital approved by the Board on an application made by a public company or as subscription to any eligible issue of capital by any public financial institution in the prescribed form.

A lock-in period of three years is provided in respect of such equity shares or debentures. In case of any sale or transfer of shares or debentures within three years of the date of acquisition, the aggregate amount of deductions allowed in respect of such equity shares or debentures in the previous year or years preceding the previous year in which such sale or transfer has taken place shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of such previous year and shall be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous year.

A person shall be treated as having acquired any shares or debentures on the date on which his name is entered in relation to those shares or debentures in the register of members or of debenture-holders, as the case may be, of the public company.

# (18) Subscription to certain units of mutual fund

Subscription to any units of any mutual fund and approved by the Board on an application made by such mutual fund in the prescribed form.

It is necessary that such units should be subscribed only in the eligible issue of capital of any company.

# (19) Investment in five year term deposit

Investment in term deposit

- (i) for a period of not less than five years with a scheduled bank; and
- (ii) which is in accordance with a scheme framed and notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette qualifies as an eligible investment for availing deduction under section 80C.

The maximum limit for investment in term deposit is ` 1,50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.19

Scheduled bank means -

1. the State Bank of India (SBI)
2. a subsidiary bank of SBI, or
3. a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act
4. any other bank, being a bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934.

# (20) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD

Subscription to such bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette) qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

# (21) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit

Investment in five year time deposit in an account under Post Office Time Deposit Rules, 1981 qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

# (22) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004

Deposit in an account under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004 qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

# (23) Contribution to additional account under NPS

Contribution by a Central Government employee to additional account under NPS (specified account) referred to in section 80CCD for a fixed period of not less than 3 years and which is in accordance with the scheme notified by the Central Government for this purpose qualifies for deduction under section 80C. It may be noted that only the contribution to the additional account under NPS will qualify for deduction under section 80C.

There are two types of NPS account i.e., Tier I and Tier II, to which an individual can contribute. Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution to individual pension account [Tier I account] under the NPS [referred to in section 20(2)(a) of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 (PFRDA)] whereas deduction under section 80C is allowable in respect of contribution by Central Government employee to additional account [Tier II account] of NPS [referred to in section 20(3) of the PFRDA], which does not qualify for deduction under section 80CCD. Thus, Tier II

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.20 INCOME TAX LAW

account is the additional account under NPS, contribution to which would qualify for deduction under section 80C only in the hands of a Central Government employee.

# (ii) Termination of Insurance Policy or Unit Linked Insurance Plan or transfer of House Property or withdrawal of deposit:

Where, in any previous year, an assessee:

1. terminates his contract of insurance referred to in (3) above, by notice to that effect or where the contract ceases to be in force by reason of not paying the premium, by not reviving the contract of insurance, -
2. - (a) in case of any single premium policy, within two years after the date of commencement of insurance; or
- (b) in any other case, before premiums have been paid for two years;

terminates his participation in any Unit Linked Insurance Plan referred to in (1) or (2) above, by notice to that effect or where he ceases to participate by reason of failure to pay any contribution, by not reviving his participation, before contributions in respect of such participation have been paid for five years, or
3. transfers the house property referred to in (16) above, before the expiry of five years from the end of the financial year in which possession of such property is obtained by him, or receives back, whether by way of refund or otherwise, any sum specified in (16) above,

then, no deduction will be allowed to the assessee in respect of sums paid during such previous year and the total amount of deductions of income allowed in respect of the previous year or years preceding such previous year, shall be deemed to be income of the assessee of such previous year and shall be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous year.

Further, where any amount is withdrawn by the assessee from his account under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme or under the Post Office Time Deposit Rules before the expiry of a period of 5 years from the date of its deposit, the amount so withdrawn shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the previous year in which the amount is withdrawn. Accordingly, the amount so withdrawn would be chargeable to tax in the assessment year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

relevant to such previous year. The amount chargeable to tax would also include that part of the amount withdrawn which represents interest accrued on the deposit.

However, if any part of the amount relating to interest so received or withdrawn has been subject to tax in any of the earlier years, such amount shall not be taxed again.

If any amount has been received by the nominee or legal heir of the assessee, on the death of such assessee, the amount would not be chargeable to tax. However, if the amount relating to interest on deposit was not included in the total income of the assessee in any of any earlier years, then, such interest would be chargeable to tax.

# Summary of investment/ contributions eligible for deduction u/s 80C

|S. No.|Investment/ contributions|
|---|---|
|(i)|Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971 In case of individual – in the name of individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual In case of HUF – in the name of any member of HUF|
|(ii)|Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund In case of individual – In the name of individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF|
|(iii)|Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual In case of HUF – on the life of any member of HUF|
|(iv)|Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual|
|(v)|Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government employee for securing a deferred annuity [excess over 1/5ᵗʰ of the salary to be ignored]|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

1. Contribution to PPF
- In case of individual – in the name of Individual, his or her spouse or any child of the individual
- In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF
2. Contribution to SPF/RPF
3. Contribution to approved superannuation Fund
4. Paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account
- (a) for any girl child of the individual; or
- (b) for any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian
5. Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII
6. Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC or any other notified insurer
7. Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI [ELSS]
8. Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI
9. Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit Scheme, 2008
10. Subscription to notified deposit scheme of public sector co. or authority constituted in India in relation to housing. For example, public deposit scheme of HUDCO.
11. Tuition fees to by an individual to any university, college, school or other educational institution within India for full-time education for maximum 2 children of the individual.
12. Repayment of housing loan for purchase/ construction of house property including stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for transfer
13. Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures forming part of any approved eligible issue of capital by a public company or by any public financial institution
14. Units of mutual fund subscribed only in eligible issue of capital of any company
15. Investment in five year term deposit with a scheduled bank

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

(xxi) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD

(xxii) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit

(xxiii) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004

(xxiv) Contribution to additional account under NPS (Tier II account), in case of Central Government employee

# 2.2 Deduction in respect of contribution to certain pension funds [Section 80CCC]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Where an assessee, being an individual, has in the previous year paid or deposited any amount out of his income chargeable to tax to effect or keep in force a contract for any annuity plan of LIC of India or any other insurer for receiving pension from the fund set up by LIC or such other insurer, he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income. For this purpose, the interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s account shall not be reckoned as contribution. Note: Where any amount paid or deposited by the assessee has been taken into account for the purposes of this section, a deduction under section 80C shall not be allowed with reference to such amount.

(ii) Maximum Deduction: The maximum permissible deduction is ` 1,50,000 (Further, the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 prescribed in section 80CCE will continue to be applicable i.e. the maximum permissible deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together is ` 1,50,000).

(iii) Deemed Income: Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the fund in respect of which a deduction has been allowed, together with interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s account is received by the assessee or his nominee on account of the surrender of the annuity plan in any previous year or as pension received from the annuity plan, such amount will be deemed to be the income of the assessee or the nominee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.24 INCOME TAX LAW

that previous year in which such withdrawal is made or pension is received. It will be chargeable to tax as income of that previous year.

# 2.3 Deduction in respect of contribution to pension scheme notified by the Central Government [Section 80CCD]

(i) Pension Scheme of Central Government: It is mandatory for persons entering the service of the Central Government on or after 1st January, 2004, to contribute 10% of their salary every month towards their pension account. A matching contribution is required to be made by the Government to the said account. The benefit of this scheme is also available to individuals employed by any other employer as well as to self-employed individuals.

(ii) Deduction: Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution made to the pension scheme notified by the Central Government. Accordingly, the Central Government has notified the ‘Atal Pension Yojana (APY)’ as a pension scheme, contribution to which would qualify for deduction under section 80CCD in the hands of the individual.

(iii) Quantum of deduction:

(a) Section 80CCD(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or deposited by an employee in his pension account subject to a maximum of 10% of his salary. The deduction in the case of a self-employed individual would be restricted to 20% of his gross total income in the previous year.

Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., if he pays tax under the optional tax regime – the normal provisions of the Act).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.25

|Deduction under section 80CCD(1)| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|An individual|employed by CG|on or after|10% of|salary|
|Eligible|Eligible|An Individual| | |
|Assessee|Assessee|employed by any|other employer| |
| |Any other|individual|20% of GTI| |

(b) Section 80CCD(1B) provides for an additional deduction of up to ` 50,000 in respect of the whole of the amount paid or deposited by an individual assessee under NPS in the previous year, whether or not any deduction is allowed u/s 80CCD(1).

Deduction u/s 80CCD(1B) would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., it is available only if the assessee pays tax under the optional tax regime – normal provisions of the Act).

(c) Whereas the deduction under section 80CCD(1) is subject to the overall limit of ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE (i.e., the maximum permissible deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together), the deduction of up to ` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) is in addition to the overall limit of ` 1.50 lakh provided under section 80CCE.

(d) Under section 80CCD(2), contribution made by the Central Government or State Government or any other employer in the previous year to the said account of an employee, is allowed as a deduction in computation of the total income of the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# 26 INCOME TAX LAW

(e) The entire employer’s contribution would be included in the salary of the employee. However, deduction under section 80CCD(2) would be restricted to,

- In case of contribution made by the Central Government or State Government - 14% of salary and
- In case of contribution made by any other employer – 10% of salary (14% of salary in case assessee is paying tax as per default tax regime under section 115BAC).

Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

1. The limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE does not apply to employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government which is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2).
2. No deduction will be allowed under section 80C in respect of amounts paid or deposited by the assessee, for which deduction has been allowed under section 80CCD(1) or under section 80CCD(1B).

# (iv) Deemed Income:

The amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the pension account (for which deduction has already been claimed by him under this section) and accretions to such account, shall be taxed as income in the year in which such amounts are received by the assessee or his nominee on -

- (a) closure of the account or
- (b) his opting out of the said scheme or
- (c) receipt of pension from the annuity plan purchased or taken on such closure or opting out.

However, the amount received by the nominee on the death of the assessee under the circumstances referred to in (a) and (b) above, shall not be deemed to be the income of the nominee.

Further, the assessee shall be deemed not to have received any amount in the previous year if such amount is used for purchasing an annuity plan in the same previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 1. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an assessee on closure of his account or on his opting out of the pension scheme [Section 10(12A)]

(i) As per section 80CCD, any payment from National Pension System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or his opting out of the pension scheme is chargeable to tax.

(ii) Section 10(12A) provides that any payment from National Pension System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or his opting out of the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, to the extent it does not exceed 60% of the total amount payable to him at the time of closure or his opting out of the scheme, shall be exempt from tax.

# 2. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an employee on partial withdrawal [Section 10(12B)]

To provide relief to an employee subscriber of NPS, section 10(12B) provides that any payment from National Pension System Trust to an employee under the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, on partial withdrawal made out of his account in accordance with the terms and conditions specified under the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 and the regulations made there under, shall be exempt from tax to the extent it does not exceed 25% of amount of contributions made by him.

# 2.4 Limit on deductions under sections 80C, 80CCC & 80CCD(1) [Section 80CCE]

This section restricts the aggregate amount of deduction under section 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) to ` 1,50,000. It may be noted that the deduction of up to ` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) and employer’s contribution to pension scheme, allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2) in the hands of the employee, would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 stipulated under section 80CCE.

|Section|Particulars|Ceiling limit (`)|
|---|---|---|
|80C|Investment in LIP, Deposit in PPF/SPF/RPF etc.|1,50,000|

# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

|80CCC|Contribution to certain pension funds|1,50,000|
|---|---|---|
|80CCD(1)|Contribution to NPS of Government|10% of salary Or 20% of GTI, as the case may be.|
|80CCE|Aggregate deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC & 80CCD(1)|1,50,000|
|80CCD(1B)|Contribution to NPS notified by the Central Government (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE)|50,000|
|80CCD(2)|Contribution by the Central Government or State Government to NPS A/c of its employees (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE)|14% of salary|
| |Contribution by any other employer to NPS A/c of its employees (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE)| |
| |- Where assessee is paying tax as per optional tax regime|10% of salary|
| |- where assessee is paying tax as per default tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A)|14% of salary|

For computation of limit under section 80CCD(1) and 80CCD(2), salary includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

The basic salary of Mr. A is ` 1,00,000 p.m. He is entitled to dearness allowance, which is 40% of basic salary. 50% of dearness allowance forms part of pay for retirement benefits. Both Mr. A and his employer, ABC Ltd., contribute 15% of basic salary to the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Explain the tax treatment in respect of such contribution in the hands of Mr. A if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

What would be your answer if Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.29 SOLUTION

(i) Tax treatment in the hands of Mr. A in respect of employer’s and own contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, where Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) [i.e., where Mr. A pays tax under the normal provisions of the Act]

(a) Employer’s contribution to such pension scheme would be treated as salary since it is specifically included in the definition of “salary” under section 17(1)(viii). Therefore, ₹ 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of ₹ 12,00,000, will be included in Mr. A’s salary.

(b) Mr. A’s contribution to pension scheme is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1). However, the deduction is restricted to 10% of salary. Salary, for this purpose, means basic pay plus dearness allowance, if it forms part of pay.

Therefore, “salary” for the purpose of deduction under section 80CCD for Mr. A would be –

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Basic salary = ₹ 1,00,000 × 12 =|12,00,000|
|Dearness allowance = 40% of ₹ 12,00,000 =|4,80,000|
|50% of Dearness Allowance forms part of pay = 50% of ₹ 4,80,000|2,40,000|
|Salary for the purpose of deduction under section 80CCD|14,40,000|
|Deduction under section 80CCD(1) is restricted to 10% of ₹ 14,40,000 (as against actual contribution of ₹ 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of ₹ 12,00,000)|1,44,000|
|As per section 80CCD(1B), a further deduction of upto ₹ 50,000 is allowable. Therefore, deduction under section 80CCD(1B) is ₹ 36,000 (₹ 1,80,000 - ₹ 1,44,000).| |

₹ 1,44,000 is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1). This would be taken into consideration and be subject to the overall limit of ₹ 1,50,000 under section 80CCE. ₹ 36,000 allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1B) is outside the overall limit of ₹ 1,50,000 under section 80CCE.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.30 INCOME TAX LAW

In the alternative, ` 50,000 can be claimed as deduction under section 80CCD(1B). The balance ` 1,30,000 (` 1,80,000- ` 50,000) can be claimed as deduction under section 80CCD(1).

(c) Employer’s contribution to pension scheme would be allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2), subject to a maximum of 10% of salary. Therefore, deduction under section 80CCD(2), would also be restricted to ` 1,44,000, even though the entire employer’s contribution of ` 1,80,000 is included in salary under section 17(1)(viii). However, this deduction of employer’s contribution of ` 1,44,000 to pension scheme would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE i.e., this deduction would be over and above the other deductions which are subject to the limit of ` 1,50,000.

(ii) Where Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC Mr. A would not be eligible for deduction under section 80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect of his contribution to pension scheme under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. However, he would be allowed deduction of upto ` 2,01,600, being 14% of salary [` 14,40,000, computed in (i) above] under section 80CCD(2) in respect of employer’s contribution to pension scheme. Accordingly, entire employer's contribution of ` 1,80,000 would be allowed as deduction under section 80CCD(2).

# ILLUSTRATION 6

The gross total income of Mr. X for the A.Y.2025-26 is ` 8,00,000. He has made the following investments/payments during the F.Y.2024-25 –

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Contribution to PPF|1,10,000|
|Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for education of his son studying in Class XI|45,000|
|Repayment of housing loan taken from Standard Chartered Bank|25,000|
|Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC|1,05,000|

Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. X exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.31 SOLUTION

# Computation of deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Amount (₹)|
|---|---|
|Deduction under section 80C| |
|- Contribution to PPF|1,10,000|
|- Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for education of his son studying in Class XI|45,000|
|- Repayment of housing loan|25,000|
| |1,80,000|
|Restricted to ₹ 1,50,000, being the maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C|1,50,000|
|Deduction under section 80CCC| |
|- Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC|1,05,000|
| |2,55,000|
|As per section 80CCE, the aggregate deduction under section 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) has to be restricted to ₹ 1,50,000| |
|Deduction allowable under Chapter VIA for the A.Y. 2025-26|1,50,000|

# 2.5 Deduction in respect of contribution to Agnipath Scheme [Section 80CCH]

1. Meaning of Agnipath scheme: Agnipath scheme is a Central Government scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment of Indian youth in the Indian Armed Forces.
2. Meaning of Agniveer Corpus Fund: The Agniveer Corpus Fund means a fund in which consolidated contributions of all the Agniveers and matching contributions of the Central Government along with interest on both these contributions are held.
3. Features of the Agnipath Scheme: Each Agniveer is to contribute 30% of his monthly customized Agniveer Package to the individual’s Agniveer Corpus Fund. Further, the Government will also contribute a matching amount to the ‘Agniveer Corpus Fund’. The Government will also pay to the subscriber.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

interest as approved from time to time on the contributions standing in his account.

# (iv) Deduction:

Section 80CCH provides deduction in respect of contribution made in the Agniveer Corpus Fund by the individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme and the Central Government.

# (v) Quantum of deduction:

(a) Section 80CCH(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or deposited by an assessee, being an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme and subscribing to the Agniveer Corpus Fund on or after 1.11.2022, in his account in the Agniveer Corpus Fund. Deduction u/s 80CCH(1) would be available to an individual only if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A).

(b) Under section 80CCH(2), the whole amount of contribution made by the Central Government to the said account of an assessee in the Agniveer Corpus Fund, is allowed as a deduction in computation of the total income of the assessee.

(c) The entire Central Government’s contribution to the Agniveer Corpus Fund would be included in the salary of the assessee. However, deduction under section 80CCH(2) would be available for the same. Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available to an individual irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# Exemption on payment from Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under the Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee [Section 10(12C)]

Any payment from the Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under the Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee would be exempt from tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 2.6 Deduction in respect of medical insurance premium [Section 80D]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# 1. In case of an Individual

1. Deduction in respect of insurance premium paid for family: A deduction to the extent of ` 25,000 is allowed in respect of the following payments –

1. premium paid to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of self, spouse and dependent children or
2. any contribution made to the Central Government Health Scheme or
3. such other health scheme as may be notified by the Central Government. Contributory Health Service Scheme of the Department of Space has been notified by the Central Government.
2. Deduction in respect of insurance premium for parents: A further deduction up to ` 25,000 is allowable to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of parents of the assessee.

Quantum of deduction in case of senior citizen: An increased deduction of ` 50,000 (instead of ` 25,000) shall be allowed in case any of the persons mentioned above is a senior citizen i.e., an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.
3. Deduction in respect of payment towards preventive health check-up: Section 80D provides that deduction to the extent of ` 5,000 shall be allowed in respect payment made on account of preventive health check-up of self, spouse, dependent children or parents during the previous year. However, the said deduction of ` 5,000 is within the overall limit of ` 25,000 or ` 50,000, specified in (i) and (ii) above.
4. Mode of payment: For claiming deduction under section 80D, the payment can be made:
# 6.34 INCOME TAX LAW

(1) by any mode, including cash, in respect of any sum paid on account of preventive health check-up;

(2) by any mode other than cash, in all other cases.

# Deduction for medical expenditure incurred on senior citizens:

As a welfare measure towards senior citizens i.e., person of the age of 60 years or more and resident in India, who are unable to get health insurance coverage, deduction of upto ` 50,000 would be allowed in respect of any payment made on account of medical expenditure in respect of a such person(s), if no payment has been made to keep in force an insurance on the health of such person(s).

# 2. In case of a HUF

Deduction under section 80D is allowable in respect of premium paid to insure the health of any member of the family. The maximum deduction available to a HUF would be ` 25,000 and in case any member is a senior citizen, ` 50,000.

Further, the amount paid on account of medical expenditure incurred on the health of any member(s) of a family who is a resident senior citizen would qualify for deduction subject to a maximum of ` 50,000 provided no amount has been paid to effect or keep in force any insurance on the health of such person(s).

# 3. Other conditions

The other conditions to be fulfilled are that such premium should be paid by any mode, other than cash, in the previous year out of his income chargeable to tax. Further, the medical insurance should be in accordance with a scheme made in this behalf by -

- (a) the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the Central Government in this behalf; or
- (b) any other insurer and approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.35

The following table summarizes the provisions of section 80D –

|S. No.|Nature of payment/ expenditure|Expenditure on behalf of|Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|I|(i) Any premium paid, otherwise than by way of cash, to keep in force an insurance on the health|In case of Self, spouse and dependent children|₹ 25,000|
| |(ii) Contribution to Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)|In case any of the above persons| |
| |(iii) Preventive health check up expenditure|is of the age of 60 years or more + resident in India|₹ 50,000|
|II|(i) Any premium paid, otherwise than by way of cash, to keep in force an insurance on the health|Parents|₹ 25,000|
| |(ii) Preventive health check up|In case either or both the parents is of the age of 60 years or more + Resident in India|₹ 50,000|

Maximum ₹ 5,000 allowed as deduction for aggregate of preventive health check-up expenditure, by any mode including cash, mentioned in I and II (Subject to overall limit of ₹ 25,000 or ₹ 50,000, as the case may be)

III Amount paid on account of medical expenditure For self/spouse/parents + who is of the age of 60 years or more + Resident in India + no payment has been made to keep in force an insurance on the health of such person ₹ 50,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Note: In case the individual or any of his family members is a senior citizen, the aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of premium, contribution to CGHS and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (I) & (III) above, cannot exceed ` 50,000.

In case one of the parents is a senior citizen who is covered under mediclaim policy and another is also a senior citizen but not covered under mediclaim policy, the aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of medical insurance premium and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (II) & (III) above, cannot exceed ` 50,000.

# 4. Deduction where premium for health insurance is paid in lump sum [Section 80D(4A)]

(i) Appropriate fraction of lump sum premium allowable as deduction:

In a case where mediclaim premium is paid in lumpsum for more than one year by:

- (a) an individual, to effect or keep in force an insurance on his health or health of his spouse, dependent children or parents; or
- (b) a HUF, to effect or keep in force an insurance on the health of any member of the family,

then, the deduction allowable under this section for each of the relevant previous year would be equal to the appropriate fraction of such lump sum payment.

(ii) Meaning of certain terms

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|Appropriate fraction|1 ÷ Total number of relevant previous years|
|Relevant previous year|The previous year in which such lump sum amount is paid; and the subsequent previous year(s) during which the insurance would be in force.|

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. A, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 20,000 during the P.Y. 2024-25 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse. He also paid medical insurance premium of ` 47,000 during the year to insure the health of his father, aged 63 years, who is not dependent on him. He contributed ` 3,600 to Central Government Health Scheme during the year. He has incurred ` 3,000 in cash on
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.37

Compute the deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

# Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Actual Payment `|Maximum deduction allowable `|
|---|---|---|
|A. Premium paid and medical expenditure incurred for self and spouse| | |
|(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self and spouse|20,000|20,000|
|(ii) Contribution to CGHS|3,600|3,600|
|(iii) Exp. on preventive health check-up of self & spouse|3,000|1,400|
| |26,600|25,000|
|B. Premium paid or medical expenditure incurred for father, who is a senior citizen| | |
|(i) Mediclaim premium paid for father, who is over 60 years of age|47,000|47,000|
|(ii) Expenditure on preventive health check-up of father|4,000|3,000|
| |51,000|50,000|
|Total deduction under section 80D (` 25,000 + ` 50,000)| |75,000|

# Notes:

1. The total deduction under A. (i), (ii) and (iii) above should not exceed ` 25,000. Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for self and spouse would be restricted to ` 1,400, being (` 25,000 – ` 20,000 – ` 3,600).
2. The total deduction under B. (i) and (ii) above should not exceed ` 50,000. Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for father would be restricted to ` 3,000, being (` 50,000 – ` 47,000).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

(3) In this case, the total deduction allowed on account of expenditure on preventive health check-up of self, spouse and father is ` 4,400 (i.e., ` 1,400 + ` 3,000), which is within the maximum permissible limit of ` 5,000.

# ILLUSTRATION 8

Mr. Y, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 22,000 during the P.Y. 2024-25 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse and dependent children. He also paid medical insurance premium of ` 33,000 during the year to insure the health of his mother, aged 67 years, who is not dependent on him. He incurred medical expenditure of ` 20,000 on his father, aged 71 years, who is not covered under mediclaim policy. His father is also not dependent upon him. He contributed ` 6,000 to Central Government Health Scheme during the year. Compute the deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. Y has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self, spouse and dependent children|22,000| |
|(ii) Contribution to CGHS|6,000| |
| |28,000| |
|restricted to| |25,000|
|(iii) Mediclaim premium paid for mother, who is over 60 years of age|33,000| |
|(iv) Medical expenditure incurred for father, who is over 60 years of age and not covered by any insurance|20,000| |
| |53,000| |
|restricted to| |50,000|
| | |75,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 2.7 Deduction in respect of maintenance including medical treatment of a dependant disabled [Section 80DD]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. Eligible assessee: Section 80DD provides deduction to an assessee, who is a resident in India, being an individual or Hindu undivided family.
2. Payments qualifying for deduction:
- Any amount –
- incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training and rehabilitation of a dependant, being a person with disability, or
- paid or deposited under a scheme framed in this behalf by the Life Insurance Corporation or any other insurer or the Administrator or the Specified Company² for the maintenance of a dependant, being a person with disability qualifies for deduction.
- The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to assessees incurring expenditure on maintenance including medical treatment of persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.
3. Quantum of deduction: The quantum of deduction is ` 75,000 and in case of severe disability (i.e., person with 80% or more disability) the deduction shall be ` 1,25,000.
4. Conditions:
- The scheme should provide for payment of annuity or a lump sum amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability, in the event of the death of the individual or member of the HUF, in whose name subscription was made;

² as referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.40 INCOME TAX LAW

on attaining the age of 60 years or more by such individual or the member of the HUF, and the payment or deposit to such scheme has been discontinued.

and the assessee must nominate either the dependant, being a person with disability or any other person or a trust to receive the payment on his behalf, for the benefit of the dependant, being a person with disability.

1. For claiming the deduction, the assessee have to furnish a copy of the certificate issued by the medical authority under the Persons with Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 along with the return of income under section 139.
2. Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after the expiry of the period mentioned in the original certificate in order to continue to claim the deduction.

# (v) Deemed income:

If the dependent, being a person with disability, predeceases the individual or the member of HUF, in whose name subscription was made, then, the amount paid or deposited under the said scheme would be the deemed income and chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee (individual or member of HUF) in the previous year in which such amount is received by him.

However, such deeming provisions would not apply, to the amount received by the dependent, being a person with disability, before his death, by way of annuity or lump sum under the scheme mentioned in II of (a) above i.e., when the individual or member of HUF attains the age of 60 years or more, and the payment or deposit to such scheme has been discontinued.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.41

# (vi) Meaning of “Dependent”:

|Assessee|Dependant|
|---|---|
|(1) Individual|the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the individual who is wholly or mainly dependant on such individual and not claimed deduction under section 80U in the computation of his income|
|(2) HUF|a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on such HUF and not claimed deduction under section 80U in the computation of his income|

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. X is a resident individual. He deposits a sum of ` 50,000 with Life Insurance Corporation every year for the maintenance of his disabled grandfather who is wholly dependent upon him. The disability is one which comes under the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995. A copy of the certificate from the medical authority is submitted. Compute the amount of deduction available under section 80DD for the A.Y. 2025-26, if Mr. X has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

Since the amount deposited by Mr. X was for his grandfather, he will not be allowed any deduction under section 80DD. The deduction is available if the individual assessee incurs any expense for a “dependant” disabled person. Grandfather does not come within the meaning of “dependant” as defined under section 80DD.

# ILLUSTRATION 10

What will be the deduction if Mr. X had made this deposit for his dependant father?

# SOLUTION

Since the expense was incurred for a dependant disabled person, Mr. X will be entitled to claim a deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD, irrespective of the amount deposited. In case his father has severe disability, the deduction would be ` 1,25,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.42 INCOME TAX LAW

# 2.8 Deduction in respect of medical treatment etc.

[Section 80DDB]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. Eligible assessee: This section provides deduction to an assessee, who is resident in India, being an individual and Hindu undivided family. The deduction is available to an individual for medical expenditure incurred on himself or a dependant. It is also available to a Hindu undivided family (HUF) for such expenditure incurred on any of its members.
2. Meaning of “Dependent”:
|Assessee|Dependent|
|---|---|
|(1) Individual|the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependant on such individual for his support and maintenance.|
|(2) HUF|a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on such HUF for his support and maintenance.|
3. Payment qualifying for deduction: Any amount actually paid for the medical treatment of such disease or ailment as may be specified by the Board for himself or a dependant, in case the assessee is an individual, or for any member of a HUF, in case the assessee is a HUF, will qualify for deduction.
4. Quantum of deduction: The amount of deduction under this section shall be equal to the amount actually paid or ₹ 40,000, whichever is less, in respect of that previous year in which such amount was actually paid. In case the amount is paid in respect of a senior citizen, i.e., a resident individual of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year, then the deduction would be the amount actually paid or ₹ 1,00,000, whichever is less. The deduction under this section shall be reduced by the amount received, if any, under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an employer, for the medical treatment of the assessee or the dependant.
5. Maximum deduction: The maximum limit of deduction under section 80DDB for these two categories of dependant are summarized hereunder:
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.43

|Dependent|Maximum limit (`)|
|---|---|
|(1) A senior citizen, being a resident individual|1,00,000|
|(2) Other than a senior citizen|40,000|

(vi) Condition: No such deduction shall be allowed unless the assessee obtains the prescription for such medical treatment from a neurologist, an oncologist, a urologist, a hematologist, an immunologist or such other specialist, as may be prescribed.

# 2.9 Deduction in respect of interest on loan taken for higher education [Section 80E]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Section 80E provides deduction to an individual-assessee in respect of any interest on loan paid by him in the previous year out of his income chargeable to tax.

(ii) Conditions: The loan must have been taken for the purpose of pursuing his higher education or for the purpose of higher education of his or her relative. The loan must have been taken from any financial institution or approved charitable institution.

(iii) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(a) Relative|Spouse and children of the individual or the student for whom the individual is the legal guardian|
|(b) Higher education|It means any course of study (including vocational studies) pursued after passing the Senior Secondary Examination or its equivalent from any school, board or university recognised by the Central Government or State Government or local authority or by any other authority authorized by the Central Government or State Government or local authority to do so. Therefore, interest on loan taken for pursuing any course after Class XII or its equivalent, will qualify for deduction under section 80E.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.44 INCOME TAX LAW

(c) Period of deduction: The deduction is allowed in computing the total income in respect of the initial assessment year (i.e. the assessment year relevant to the previous year, in which the assessee starts paying the interest on the loan) and seven assessment years immediately succeeding the initial assessment year or until the interest is paid in full by the assessee, whichever is earlier.

(d) Approved charitable institution: It means an institution established for charitable purposes and approved by the prescribed authority3 or an institution referred to in section 80G(2)(a).

(e) Financial institution: It means –

- (a) a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including a bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of the Act); or
- (b) any other financial institution which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. B has taken three education loans on April 1, 2024, the details of which are given below:

| |Loan 1|Loan 2|Loan 3|
|---|---|---|---|
|For whose education loan was taken|B|Son of B|Daughter of B|
|Purpose of loan|MBA|B. Sc.|B.A.|
|Amount of loan (`)|5,00,000|2,00,000|4,00,000|
|Annual repayment of loan (`)|1,00,000|40,000|80,000|
|Annual repayment of interest (`)|20,000|10,000|18,000|

Compute the amount deductible under section 80E for the A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. B has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

3 under section 10(23C)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.45 SOLUTION

Deduction under section 80E is available to an individual assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), in respect of any interest paid by him in the previous year in respect of loan taken for pursuing his higher education or higher education of his spouse or children. Higher education means any course of study pursued after senior secondary examination.

Therefore, interest repayment in respect of all the above loans would be eligible for deduction.

Deduction under section 80E = ` 20,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 18,000 = ` 48,000.

# 2.10 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of residential house property by an individual [Section 80EE]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.
2. Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as follows –

Value of house ≤ ` 50 lakhsThe assessee should not own any residential house on the date of sanction of loanLoan should be sanctioned during the P.Y.2016-17Loan sanctioned ≤ ` 35 lakhs
3. Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be available till the repayment of loan continues.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# (iv) Quantum of deduction:

The maximum deduction allowable is ` 50,000. The deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80EE is over and above the deduction of upto ` 2,00,000 available under section 24 for interest paid in respect of loan borrowed for acquisition of a self-occupied property.

# (v) No deduction under any other provision:

The interest allowed as deduction under section 80EE will not be allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

# (vi) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(a) Financial institution|• A banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or • Any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or • A housing finance company.|
|(b) Housing finance company|A public company formed or registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.|

# ILLUSTRATION 12

Mr. A purchased a residential house property for self-occupation at a cost of ` 45 lakh on 1.4.2017, in respect of which he took a housing loan of ` 35 lakh from Bank of India@11% p.a. on the same date. The loan was sanctioned on 28ᵗʰ March, 2017. Compute the eligible deduction in respect of interest on housing loan for A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), assuming that the entire loan was outstanding as on 31.3.2025 and he does not own any other house property.

# SOLUTION

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Interest deduction for A.Y.2025-26| |
|(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the head “Income from house property”| |
|Deduction under section 24(b)|` 3,85,000|
|[` 35,00,000 × 11%]| |

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

Restricted to 2,00,000

# (ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income

Deduction under section 80EE 1,85,000 (3,85,000 – 2,00,000)

Restricted to 50,000

# 2.11 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of residential house property [Section 80EEA]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# (i) Eligible assessee:

An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.

# (ii) Conditions:

The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as follows –

Stamp Duty Value of house ≤ 45 lakhsThe individual should not own any residential house on the date of sanction of loanLoan should be sanctioned by the Financial Institution between 1st April, 2019 and 31st March 2022The individual should not be eligible to claim deduction u/s 80EE

# (iii) Period of benefit:

The benefit of deduction under this section would be available for interest payable for each assessment year.

# (iv) Quantum of deduction:

The maximum deduction allowable is 1,50,000. The deduction of up to 1,50,000 under section 80EEA is over and above the
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction available under section 24(b) in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property.

(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction under section 80EEA will not be allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

(vi) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(a) Financial institution|• A banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or • Any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or • A housing finance company.|
|(b) Housing finance company|A public company formed or registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.|

In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property| | |
|---|---|---|
|In case of self-occupied house property|In case of let out or deemed to be let out property| |
| |No interest deduction u/s 24(b)|No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest payable is allowable as deduction. However, loss from house property cannot be set off against income under any other head.|
| |No deduction u/s 80EEA|No deduction u/s 80EEA|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

In case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

# Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property

|In case of self-occupied house property|In case of let out or deemed to be let out property|
|---|---|
|restricted to ` 2,00,000 u/s 24(b)|No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest payable is allowable as deduction.|
| |However, section 71(3A) restricts set off of loss from house property against income under any other head to ` 2,00,000.|
|Deduction for interest upto ` 1,50,000 can be claimed u/s 80EEA over and above deduction u/s 24(b)|If there is a loss from house property and it is more than ` 2,00,000, interest of ` 2,00,000 can be claimed as deduction u/s 24(b) and balance interest upto ` 1,50,000 can be claimed u/s 80EEA.|

# Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle [Section 80EEB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible Assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for purchase of an electric vehicle from any financial institution. Interest payable on such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.50 INCOME TAX LAW

# (ii) Conditions:

The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as follows –

|Loan should be taken for|purchase of an electric vehicle|
|---|---|
|The assessee should be|an individual.|
|Conditions|Loan should be sanctioned between|
| |1.4.2019 and 31.3.2023|
|Loan should be|sanctioned by a FI (bank or specified NBFCs)|

# (iii) Period of benefit:

The benefit of deduction under this section would be available for interest payable on such loan for each assessment year.

# (iv) Quantum of deduction:

Interest payable, subject to a maximum of ` 1,50,000.

# (v) No deduction under any other provision:

The interest allowed as deduction under section 80EEB will not be allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

# (vi) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(a) Financial institution|• A banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or • Any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or • Any deposit taking NBFC; or • A systemically important non-deposit taking NBFC i.e., a NBFC which is not accepting or holding public deposits and having total assets of not less than ` 500 crore as per the last audited balance sheet and is registered with the RBI.|
|(b) Electric Vehicle|A vehicle which is powered exclusively by an electric motor whose traction energy is supplied exclusively by traction battery installed in the vehicle.|

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

should have electric regenerative braking system, which during braking provides for the conversion of vehicle kinetic energy into electrical energy.

# ILLUSTRATION 13

The following are the particulars relating to Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D, salaried individuals, for A.Y. 2025-26 –

|Particulars|Mr. A|Mr. B|Mr. C|Mr. D|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Amount of loan taken|₹ 43 lakhs|₹ 45 lakhs|₹ 20 lakhs|₹ 15 lakhs|
|Loan taken from|HFC|Deposit taking NBFC|Deposit taking NBFC|Public sector bank|
|Date of sanction of loan|1.4.2021|1.4.2020|1.4.2020|30.3.2019|
|Date of disbursement of loan|1.5.2021|1.5.2020|1.5.2020|1.5.2019|
|Purpose of loan|Acquisition of residential house property for self-occupation|Acquisition of residential house property for self-occupation|Purchase of electric vehicle for personal use|Purchase of electric vehicle for personal use|
|Stamp duty value of house property|₹ 45 lakhs|₹ 48 lakhs|-|-|
|Cost of electric vehicle|-|-|₹ 22 lakhs|₹ 18 lakhs|
|Rate of interest|9% p.a.|9% p.a.|10% p.a.|10% p.a.|

Compute the amount of deduction, if any, allowable under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y.2025-26 in the hands of Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D if they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Assume that there has been no principal repayment in respect of any of the above loans upto 31.3.2025.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW SOLUTION

|Particulars|Mr. A|Mr. B|Mr. C|Mr. D|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Interest deduction for A.Y.2025-26|- (i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the head “Income from house property”
- Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 3,87,000 [` 43,00,000 × 9%]
- Restricted to ` 2,00,000
- (ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
- Deduction u/s 80EEA ` 1,87,000 (` 3,87,000 – ` 2,00,000)
- Restricted to ` 1,50,000
|- (i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the head “Income from house property”
- Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 4,05,000 [` 45,00,000 × 9%]
- Restricted to ` 2,00,000
- (ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
- Deduction u/s 80EEA is not permissible since: Nil
- (i) loan is taken from NBFC
- (ii) stamp duty value exceeds ` 45 lakh.
- Deduction under section 80EEA would not be permissible due to either violation listed above.
|- Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
- Deduction u/s 80EEB for interest payable on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle ` 1,50,000
- [` 20 lakhs x 10% = ` 2,00,000, restricted to ` 1,50,000, being the maximum permissible deduction]
|- Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
- Deduction u/s 80EEB is not permissible since loan was sanctioned before 1.4.2019.
|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 2.13 Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc. [Section 80G]

(i) Eligible assessee: An assessee who pays any sum as donation to eligible funds or institutions, is entitled to a deduction, subject to certain limitations, from the gross total income.

In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It would not be available if they pay concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be available if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/115BAB and section 115BAD/115BAE, respectively. In other words, deduction would be available only if they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.

(ii) Quantum of deduction:

There are four categories of deductions. The following table gives the details of the institutions and funds to which donations can be made for the purpose of claiming deduction under section 80G, –

|I|Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, without any qualifying limit|
|---|---|
|(1)|The National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government|
|(2)|Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund.|
|(3)|Prime Minister’s Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund|
|(4)|The Africa (Public Contributions-India) Fund|
|(5)|The National Children’s Fund|
|(6)|The National Foundation for Communal Harmony|
|(7)|Approved University or educational institution of national eminence|
|(8)|Chief Minister’s Earthquake Relief Fund, Maharashtra|
|(9)|Any fund set up by the State Government of Gujarat exclusively for providing relief to the victims of the Gujarat earthquake|

# 6.54 INCOME TAX LAW

1. Any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district for improvement of primary education in villages and towns and for literacy and post-literacy activities
2. National Blood Transfusion Council or any State Blood Transfusion Council whose sole objective is the control, supervision, regulation or encouragement in India of the services related to operation and requirements of blood banks
3. Any State Government Fund set up to provide medical relief to the poor
4. The Army Central Welfare Fund or Indian Naval Benevolent Fund or Air Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of the Union for the welfare of past and present members of such forces or their dependents.
5. The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister’s Cyclone Relief Fund, 1996
6. The National Illness Assistance Fund
7. The Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund in respect of any State or Union Territory
8. The National Sports Development Fund set up by the Central Government
9. The National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government
10. The Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by the Central Government
11. National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities
12. The Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the Central Government, other than the sum spent by the assessee in pursuance of CSR u/s 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013
13. The Clean Ganga Fund, set up by the Central Government, where such assessee is a resident, other than the sum spent in pursuance of CSR u/s 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013
14. The National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse
15. Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund (PM Cares Fund)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.55

# II Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, without any qualifying limit

1. Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund

# III Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, subject to qualifying limit

1. The Government or to any approved local authority, institution or association for promotion of family planning
2. Sum paid by a company as donation to the Indian Olympic Association or any other association/institution established in India, as may be notified by the Government for the development of infrastructure for sports or games, or the sponsorship of sports and games in India

# IV Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit

1. Any Institution or Fund established in India for charitable purposes fulfilling prescribed conditions
2. The Government or any local authority for utilisation for any charitable purpose other than the purpose of promoting family planning
3. An authority constituted in India by or under any other law enacted either for dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages, or both
4. Any Corporation established by the Central Government or any State Government for promoting the interests of the members of a minority community
5. For renovation or repair of Notified temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place of historic, archaeological or artistic importance or which is a place of public worship of renown throughout any State or States

(iii) Qualifying limit: The eligible donations referred to in III and IV should be aggregated and the sum total should be limited to 10% of the adjusted gross total income. This would be the maximum permissible deduction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

The donations qualifying for 100% deduction would be first adjusted from the maximum permissible deduction and thereafter 50% deduction of the balance would be allowed.

# Steps for computation of qualifying limit

1. Compute adjusted total income i.e., the GTI as reduced by the following:
- Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except under section 80G
- Short-term capital gain taxable under section 111A
- Long-term capital gains taxable under sections 112 & 112A
- Any income on which income-tax is not payable
2. Calculate 10% of adjusted total income
3. Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to qualifying limit (Total of Category III and IV donations, shown in the table above)
4. Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum permissible deduction.
5. The said deduction is adjusted first against donations qualifying for 100% deduction (i.e., Category III donations). Thereafter, 50% of balance qualifies for deduction under section 80G.

# Other points:

1. Where an assessee has claimed and has been allowed any deduction under this section in respect of any amount of donation, the same amount will not qualify for deduction under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.
2. Donations in kind shall not qualify for deduction.
3. No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.
4. The deduction under section 80G can be claimed whether it has any nexus with the business of the assessee or not.
5. As per Circular No.2/2005 dated 12.1.2005, in cases where employees make donations to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund, the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund through their respective employers, it is not possible for such funds to issue separate certificate to every such employee in respect of donations.
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

made to such funds as contributions made to these funds are in the form of a consolidated cheque. An employee who makes donations towards these funds is eligible to claim deduction under section 80G. It is, hereby, clarified that the claim in respect of such donations as indicated above will be admissible under section 80G on the basis of the certificate issued by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO)/Employer in this behalf.

(6) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any donation made to an institution or fund [referred to in point (1) under (IV) “Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit”], in the return of income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the basis of information relating to said donation furnished by the institution or fund to the prescribed income-tax authority or person authorized by such authority, subject to verification as per the risk management strategy formulated by the CBDT from time to time.

# ILLUSTRATION 14

Mr. Shiva aged 58 years, has gross total income of ` 7,75,000 comprising of income from salary and house property. He has made the following payments and investments:

- (i) Premium paid to insure the life of her major daughter (policy taken on 1.4.2018) (Assured value ` 1,80,000) – ` 20,000.
- (ii) Medical Insurance premium for self – ` 12,000; Spouse – ` 14,000.
- (iii) Donation to a public charitable institution ` 50,000 by way of cheque.
- (iv) LIC Pension Fund – ` 60,000.
- (v) Donation to National Children’s Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque.
- (vi) Donation to Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque.
- (vii) Donation to approved institution for promotion of family planning - ` 40,000 by way of cheque.
- (viii) Deposit in PPF – ` 1,00,000.

Compute the total income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26 if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW SOLUTION

# Computation of Total Income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Total Income|7,75,000| |
|Less: Deduction under section 80C| | |
|Deposit in PPF|1,00,000| |
|Life insurance premium paid for insurance of major daughter (Maximum 10% of the assured value ` 1,80,000, as the policy is taken after 31.3.2012)|18,000| |
| |1,18,000| |
|Deduction under section 80CCC in respect of LIC pension fund|60,000| |
| |1,78,000| |
|As per section 80CCE, deduction under section 80C & 80CCC is restricted to|1,50,000| |
|Deduction under section 80D| | |
|Medical Insurance premium in respect of self and spouse|26,000| |
|Restricted to|25,000| |
|Deduction under section 80G (See Working Note below)|87,500| |
|Total income|5,12,500| |

# Working Note: Computation of deduction under section 80G

|Particulars of donation donated|Amount (`)|% of deduction|Deduction u/s 80G (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) National Children’s Fund|25,000|100%|25,000|
|(ii) Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund|25,000|50%|12,500|
|(iii) Approved institution for promotion of family planning|40,000|100%, subject to qualifying limit|40,000|
|(iv) Public Charitable Trust|50,000|50% subject to qualifying limit (See Note below)|10,000|
| | | |87,500|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

Note - Adjusted total income = Gross Total Income – Amount of deductions under section 80C to 80U except section 80G i.e., ` 6,00,000, in this case. ` 60,000, being 10% of adjusted total income is the qualifying limit, in this case.

Firstly, donation of ` 40,000 to approved institution for family planning qualifying for 100% deduction subject to qualifying limit, has to be adjusted against this amount. Thereafter, donation to public charitable trust qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit is adjusted. Hence, the contribution of ` 50,000 to public charitable trust is restricted to 20,000 (being, ` 60,000 - ` 40,000), 50% of which would be the deduction under section 80G. Therefore, the deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to public charitable trust would be ` 10,000, which is 50% of ` 20,000.

# 2.14 Deduction in respect of rent paid [Section 80GG]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Assessee, who is not in receipt of HRA qualifying for exemption under section 10(13A) from employer and who pays rent for accommodation occupied by him for residential purposes.

(ii) Conditions: The following conditions have to be satisfied for claiming deduction under section 80GG -

1. The assessee should not be receiving any house rent allowance exempt under section 10(13A).
2. The expenditure incurred by him on rent of any furnished or unfurnished accommodation should exceed 10% of his total income arrived at after all deductions under Chapter VI-A except section 80GG.
3. The accommodation should be occupied by the assessee for the purposes of his own residence.
4. The assessee should fulfill such other conditions or limitations as may be prescribed, having regard to the area or place in which such accommodation is situated and other relevant considerations.
5. The assessee or his spouse or his minor child or a HUF of which he is a member should not own any accommodation at the place where he.
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

ordinarily resides or perform duties of his office or employment or carries on his business or profession; or

(6) If the assessee owns any accommodation at any place other than that referred to above, such accommodation should not be in the occupation of the assessee and its annual value is not required to be determined under section 23(2)(a) or section 23(4)(a).

(7) The assessee should file a declaration in the prescribed form, confirming the details of rent paid and fulfillment of other conditions, with the return of income.

# (iii) Quantum of deduction:

The deduction admissible will be the least of the following:

1. Actual rent paid minus 10% of the total income of the assessee before allowing the deduction, or
2. 25% of such total income (arrived at after making all deductions under Chapter VI A but before making any deduction under this section), or
3. Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m.

# ILLUSTRATION 15

Mr. Ganesh, a businessman, whose total income (before allowing deduction under section 80GG) for A.Y.2025-26 is ` 4,60,000, paid house rent at ` 12,000 p.m. in respect of residential accommodation occupied by him at Mumbai. Compute the deduction allowable to him under section 80GG for A.Y.2025-26 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

The deduction under section 80GG will be computed as follows:

1. Actual rent paid less 10% of total income

` 1,44,000 (-) (10×4,60,000) = ` 98,000

100
2. 25% of total income = 25×4,60,000 = ` 1,15,000

100
3. Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m. = ` 60,000

Deduction allowable u/s 80GG [least of (i), (ii) and (iii)] = ` 60,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 2.15 Deduction in respect of donations for scientific research and rural development [Section 80GGA]

(i) Eligible assessee: Any assessee not having income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, who makes donations for scientific research or rural development.

An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person will be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGA only if they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction:

- (1) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a research association which has, as its object, the undertaking of scientific research or to a University, college or other institution to be used for scientific research; Such association, University, college or institution must be approved under section 35(1)(ii).
- (2) Any sum paid to a research association which has as its object the undertaking of research in social science or statistical research, University, College or other institution to be used for research in social science or statistical research. Such association, University, college or institution must be approved under section 35(1)(iii).
- (3) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to an association or institution which has as its object the undertaking of any programme of rural development, to be used for carrying out any programme of rural development approved by the prescribed authority for purposes of section 35CCA or to an institution or association which has as its object the training of persons for implementing programmes of rural development.

It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor) is entitled on account of payment of any sum to a research association or university or college or other institution.
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

for scientific research or research in a social science or statistical research or an association or institution for carrying out the programme of rural development or shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn.

(4) Any sum paid to a public sector company or a local authority or to an association or institution approved by the National Committee for carrying out any eligible project or scheme. It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor) is entitled on account of above shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn or the notification notifying the eligible project or scheme carried out aforesaid entities has been withdrawn.

(5) Any sum paid to a rural development fund set up and notified under section 35CCA.

(6) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to National Urban Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF).

# Restrictions on deduction:

(1) No deduction under this section would be allowed in the case of an assessee whose gross total income includes income which is chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession.”

(2) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any assessment year, deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such payment under any provision of this Act for the same or any other assessment year.

(3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.

(4) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any sum referred to under “(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction” in the return of
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the basis of information relating to such sum furnished by the payee to the prescribed income-tax authority or person authorized by such authority, subject to verification as per the risk management strategy formulated by the CBDT from time to time.

# 2.16 Deduction in respect of contributions given by companies to political parties [Section 80GGB]

(i) Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum contributed in the previous year by an Indian company4 to any political party or an electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum contributed by way of cash.

(ii) Meaning of “Contribute”: For the purposes of this section, the word “contribute” has the same meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the Companies Act, 19565, which provides that -

- (a) a donation or subscription or payment given by a company to a person for carrying on any activity which is likely to effect public support for a political party shall also be deemed to be contribution for a political purpose;
- (b) the expenditure incurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on advertisement in any publication (being a publication in the nature of a souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like) by or on behalf of a political party or for its advantage shall also be deemed to be a contribution to such political party or a contribution for a political purpose to the person publishing it.

(iii) Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

# ILLUSTRATION 16

During the P.Y. 2024-25, ABC Ltd., an Indian company,

1. contributed a sum of ` 2 lakh to an electoral trust; and

4 Not opting for section 115BAA/ 115BAB

5 Now section 182 of the Companies Act, 2013

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.64 INCOME TAX LAW

(2) incurred expenditure of ` 25,000 on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.

Is the company eligible for deduction in respect of such contribution/expenditure, assuming that the contribution was made by cheque? If so, what is the quantum of deduction? ABC Ltd. does not opt for section 115BAA/115BAB.

# SOLUTION

An Indian company is eligible for deduction under section 80GGB in respect of any sum contributed by it in the previous year to any political party or an electoral trust. Further, the word “contribute” in section 80GGB has the meaning assigned to it in section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, and accordingly, it includes the amount of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.

Therefore, ABC Ltd. is eligible for a deduction of ` 2,25,000 under section 80GGB in respect of sum of ` 2 lakh contributed to an electoral trust and ` 25,000 incurred by it on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.

It may be noted that there is a specific disallowance under section 37(2B) in respect of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party. Therefore, the expenditure of ` 25,000 would be disallowed while computing business income/gross total income. However, the said expenditure incurred by an Indian company is allowable as a deduction from gross total income under section 80GGB.

# 2.17 Deduction in respect of contributions given by any person to political parties [Section 80GGC]

1. Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum contributed in the previous year by any person to a political party or an electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum contributed by way of cash.
2. Persons not eligible for deduction: This deduction will, however, not be available to a local authority and an artificial juridical person, wholly or partly funded by the Government.
3. Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.65

An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI would be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGC only if they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). A co-operative society will not be eligible for deduction if it opts for special provisions of section 115BAD/115BAE.

# 3. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN INCOMES

# 3.1 Deduction in respect of employment of new employees [Section 80JJAA]

(i) Quantum and period of deduction: Where the gross total income of an assessee to whom section 44AB applies, includes any profits and gains derived from business, a deduction of an amount equal to 30% of additional employee cost incurred in the course of such business in the previous year, would be allowed for three assessment years including the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such employment is provided.

(ii) Conditions to be fulfilled: The deduction would be allowed only subject to fulfilment of the following conditions:

|The business is|The business should not be formed by splitting up, or the transfer from any other person or as a result of any business reorganisation|
|---|---|
|The report of the accountant, giving the prescribed particulars, has to be furnished before 30th September of the A.Y., being the specified date referred to in Section 44AB i.e., the date one month prior to due date for filing ROI u/s 139(1)| |

(iii) Meaning of certain terms:

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(a) Additional employee cost|Total emoluments paid or payable to additional employees employed during the previous year.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

In the case of an existing business, the additional employee cost shall be Nil, if -

1. there is no increase in the number of employees from the total number of employees employed as on the last day of the preceding year;
2. emoluments are paid otherwise than by an account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or by use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through any other prescribed electronic mode [credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate Payment Services), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Fund Transfer), BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay].

In the first year of a new business, the emoluments paid6 or payable to employees employed during that previous year shall be deemed to be the additional employee cost.

# (b) Additional employee

An employee who has been employed during the previous year and whose employment has the effect of increasing the total number of employees employed by the employer as on the last day of the preceding year.

# Exclusions from the definition:

1. an employee whose total emoluments are more than ` 25,000 per month; or
2. an employee for whom the entire contribution is

6 As per Form No.10DA read with Rule 19AB, the amount shall not include emoluments paid otherwise than by way of account payee cheque/bank draft/ECS through a bank account and prescribed electronic modes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.67 paid by the Government under the Employees’ Pension Scheme notified in accordance with the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952; or

(c) an employee who does not participate in the recognised provident fund.

(d) an employee employed for a period of less than 240 days during the previous year. In case of an assessee engaged in the business of manufacturing of apparel or footwear or leather products, an employee employed for a period of less than 150 days during the previous year; or

Note – If an employee is employed during the previous year for less than 240 days or 150 days, as the case may be, but is employed for a period of 240 days or 150 days, as the case may be, in the immediately succeeding year, he shall be deemed to have been employed in the succeeding year.

Accordingly, the employer would be entitled to deduction of 30% of additional employee cost of such employees for three years from the succeeding year.

(c) Emoluments any sum paid or payable to an employee in lieu of his employment by whatever name called.

Exclusions from the definition:

(a) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund or any other fund for the benefit of the employee under any law for the time being in force; and

(b) any lump-sum payment paid or payable to an employee at the time of termination of his service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, such as gratuity, severance pay, leave encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits, commutation of pension and the like.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction u/s 80JJAA would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

# ILLUSTRATION 17

Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of computers on 1.4.2024. He employed 350 new employees during the P.Y. 2024-25, the details of whom are as follows –

|No. of employees|Date of employment|Regular/Casual|Total monthly emoluments per employee (₹)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(i) 75|1.4.2024|Regular|24,000|
|(ii) 125|1.5.2024|Regular|26,000|
|(iii) 50|1.8.2024|Casual|24,500|
|(iv) 100|1.9.2024|Regular|24,000|

The regular employees participate in recognized provident fund while the casual employees do not. Compute the deduction, if any, available to Mr. A for A.Y. 2025-26, if the profits and gains derived from manufacture of computers that year is ₹ 75 lakhs and his total turnover is ₹ 10.16 crores.

What would be your answer if Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of footwear on 1.4.2024?

# SOLUTION

Mr. A is eligible for deduction under section 80JJAA since he is subject to tax audit under section 44AB for A.Y. 2025-26 and he has employed “additional employees” during the P.Y. 2024-25.

# If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of computers

Additional employee cost = ₹ 24,000 × 12 × 75 [See Working Note below]

= ₹ 2,16,00,000

Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ₹ 2,16,00,000 = ₹ 64,80,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.69

# Working Note:

# Number of additional employees

|Particulars|No. of workmen|
|---|---|
|Total number of employees employed during the year|350|
|Less: Casual employees employed on 1.8.2024 who do not participate in recognized provident fund|50|
|Regular employees employed on 1.5.2024, since their total monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000|125|
|Regular employees employed on 1.9.2024 since they have been employed for less than 240 days in the P.Y.2024-25.|100|
|Total|275|

Number of “additional employees” 75

# Notes –

(i) Since casual employees do not participate in recognized provident fund, they do not qualify as additional employees. Further, 125 regular employees employed on 1.5.2024 also do not qualify as additional employees since their monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000. Also, 100 regular employees employed on 1.9.2024 do not qualify as additional employees for the P.Y.2024-25, since they are employed for less than 240 days in that year. Therefore, only 75 employees employed on 1.4.2024 qualify as additional employees, and the total emoluments paid or payable to them during the P.Y.2024-25 is deemed to be the additional employee cost.

(ii) As regards 100 regular employees employed on 1.9.2024, they would be treated as additional employees for previous year 2025-26, if they continue to be employees in that year for a minimum period of 240 days. Accordingly, 30% of additional employee cost in respect of such employees would be allowable as deduction under section 80JJAA in the hands of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2026-27.

# If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear

If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear, then, he would be entitled to deduction under section 80JJAA in respect of employee cost of
# INCOME TAX LAW

Regular employees employed on 1.9.2024, since they have been employed for more than 150 days in the previous year 2024-25.

Additional employee cost = ` 2,16,00,000 + ` 24,000 × 7 × 100 = ` 3,84,00,000

Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 3,84,00,000 = ` 1,15,20,000.

# 3.2 Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain books other than text books [Section 80QQB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# (i) Eligible assessee & Quantum of deduction:

Under section 80QQB, deduction of up to a maximum ` 3,00,000 is allowed to an individual resident in India in respect of income derived as author or joint author i.e., the deduction shall be the income derived as author or as joint author or ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.

# (ii) Eligible Income:

(a) This income may be received either by way of a lumpsum consideration for the assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book.

(b) Such book should be a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of royalties or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or otherwise) in respect of such book.

(c) This deduction shall not, however, be available in respect of royalty income from textbook for schools, guides, commentaries, brochures, diaries, magazines, newspapers, journals, pamphlets, tracts and other publications of similar nature.

Note - Where an assessee claims deduction under this section, no deduction in respect of the same income may be claimed under any other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

# (iii) Manner of computation of deduction:

For the purpose of calculating the deduction under this section, the amount of eligible income (royalty or copyright fee received otherwise than by way of lumpsum) before allowing expenses attributable to such income, shall not exceed 15% of the value of the books sold during the previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

However, this condition is not applicable where the royalty or copyright fees is receivable in lump sum in lieu of all rights of the author in the book.

# (iv) Conditions:

- (a) Furnishing of certificate in prescribed form: For claiming the deduction, the assessee shall have to furnish a certificate in the prescribed manner in the prescribed format, duly verified by the person responsible for making such payment, setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed.
- (b) Period for repatriation of income earned outside India: Where the assessee earns any income from any source outside India, he should bring such income into India in convertible foreign exchange within a period of six months from the end of the previous year in which such income is earned or within such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf for the purpose of claiming deduction under this section.

The competent authority shall mean the Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.

# ILLUSTRATION 18

Mr. Aakash earned royalty of ` 2,88,000 from a foreign country for a book authored by him, being a work of literary nature. The rate of royalty is 18% of value of books.

The expenditure incurred by him for earning this royalty was ` 40,000. The amount remitted to India till 30th September, 2025 is ` 2,30,000. The remaining amount was not remitted till 31st March, 2026. Compute the amount includible in the gross total income of Mr. Aakash and the amount of deduction which he will be eligible for under section 80QQB if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

The net royalty of ` 2,48,000 (i.e., royalty of ` 2,88,000 less ` 40,000, being expenditure to earn such income) is includible in gross total income. Deduction u/s 80QQB would be ` 1,90,000 as calculated hereunder –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

| |Particulars| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Royalty|2,88,000 x 15/18 =|2,40,000| | |
|Restricted to|Amount brought into India in convertible foreign exchange within the prescribed time|2,30,000| | |
|Less: Expenses already allowed as deduction while computing royalty income|40,000| | | |
|Deduction u/s 80QQB| | |1,90,000| |

# 3.3 Deduction in respect of royalty on patents [Section 80RRB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. Eligible assessee: A resident individual who is registered as the true and first inventor in respect of an invention under the Patents Act, 1970, including the co-owner of the patent and earning income by way of royalty of a patent registered on or after 1.4.2003.
2. Quantum of deduction: Income by way of royalty of a patent registered on or after 1.4.2003, subject to a maximum of ` 3 lakhs.

Note - No deduction in respect of such income will be allowed under any other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
3. Eligible income: This exemption shall be restricted to the royalty income including consideration for transfer of rights in the patent or for providing information for working or use of a patent, use of a patent or the rendering of any services in connection with these activities. The exemption shall not be available on any consideration for sale of product manufactured with the use of the patented process or patented article for commercial use.
4. Conditions: In respect of any such income which is earned from sources outside India, the deduction shall be restricted to such sum as is brought to India in convertible foreign exchange within a period of 6 months from the end of the previous year in which such income is earned or extended period as is allowed by the competent authority (Reserve Bank of India). For claiming this deduction the assessee shall be required to furnish a certificate in the prescribed form signed by the prescribed authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 4. DEDUCTION IN RESPECT OF OTHER INCOME

# 4.1 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in savings accounts [Section 80TTA]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# (i) Eligible assessee and Quantum of deduction:

Section 80TTA provides that in case the gross total income of an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu Undivided Family, includes any income by way of an interest on deposits in a saving account (not being time deposits, which are deposits repayable on expiry of fixed periods), deduction up to ` 10,000 in aggregate shall be allowed while computing the total income of such assessee. Such deduction shall be allowed in case the saving account is maintained with:

1. a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);
2. a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank); or
3. a post office.

Deduction under this section would, however, not be available to a senior citizen eligible for deduction under section 80TTB.

# (ii) Restrictions:

If the aforesaid income is derived from any deposit in a savings account held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP/BOI, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of such income in computing the total income of any partner of the firm or any member of the AOP or any individual of the BOI. In effect, the deduction under this section shall be allowed only in respect of the income derived in form of the interest on the saving bank deposit (other than time deposits) made by the individual or Hindu Undivided Family directly.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.74 INCOME TAX LAW

# 4.2 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in case of senior citizens [Section 80TTB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. Eligible assessee: A senior citizen (a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year), whose gross total income includes income by way of interest on deposits (both fixed deposits and saving accounts) with –
1. a banking company to which Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies
2. a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank)
3. a Post Office.
2. Quantum of deduction: Actual amount of interest on deposits or ₹ 50,000, whichever is lower.
3. Non-availability of deduction to partner/member, where deposit held by firm/AOP/BOI: Where interest income is derived from any deposit held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP or a BOI, the partner of the firm or member of AOP/BOI would not be allowed deduction in respect of such income while computing their total income.

# ILLUSTRATION 19

Mr. A, a resident individual aged 61 years, has earned business income (computed) of ₹ 1,35,000, lottery income of ₹ 1,20,000 (gross) during the P.Y. 2024-25. He also has interest on Fixed Deposit of ₹ 30,000 with banks. He invested an amount of ₹ 1,50,000 in Public Provident Fund account. What is the total income of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# SOLUTION

# Computation of total income of Mr. A for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business or profession|1,35,000| |
|Income from other sources| | |
|- Interest on Fixed Deposit with banks|30,000| |
|- lottery income|1,20,000| |
|Gross Total Income|2,85,000| |
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA [See Note below]| | |
|Under section 80C| | |
|- Deposit in Public Provident Fund|1,50,000| |
|Under section 80TTB| | |
|- Interest on fixed deposits with banks|30,000| |
| |1,80,000| |
|Restricted to|1,65,000| |
|Total Income|1,20,000| |

Note: In case of resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more, interest on bank fixed deposits qualifies for deduction upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB. Though the aggregate of deductions under Chapter VI-A is ` 1,80,000, however, the maximum permissible deduction cannot exceed the gross total income exclusive of long term capital gains taxable under section 112 and section 112A, short-term capital gains covered under section 111A and winnings from lotteries of the assessee. Therefore, the maximum permissible deduction under Chapter VI-A = ` 2,85,000 – ` 1,20,000 = ` 1,65,000.

# ILLUSTRATION 20

Mr. Gurnam, aged 42 years, has salary income (computed) of ` 5,50,000 for the previous year ended 31.03.2025. He has earned interest of ` 14,500 on the saving bank account with State Bank of India during the year. Compute the total income of Mr. Gurnam for the assessment year 2025-26 from the following particulars, assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

1. Life insurance premium paid to Birla Sunlife Insurance in cash amounting to ` 25,000 for insurance of life of his dependent parents. The insurance policy was taken on 15.07.2021 and the sum assured on life of his dependent parents is ` 2,00,000.
2. Life insurance premium of ` 19,500 paid for the insurance of life of his major son who is not dependent on him. The sum assured on life of his son is ` 3,50,000 and the life insurance policy was taken on 30.3.2012.
3. Life insurance premium paid by cheque of ` 22,500 for insurance of his life. The insurance policy was taken on 08.09.2020 and the sum assured is ` 2,00,000.
4. Premium of ` 26,000 paid by cheque for health insurance of self and his wife.
5. ` 1,500 paid in cash for his health check-up and ` 4,500 paid in cheque for preventive health check-up for his parents, who are senior citizens.
6. Paid interest of ` 6,500 on loan taken from bank for MBA course pursued by his daughter.
7. A sum of ` 5,000 donated in cash to an institution approved for purpose of section 80G for promoting family planning.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of total income of Mr. Gurnam for the Assessment Year 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from salary|5,50,000| |
|Interest on saving bank deposit|14,500| |
|Gross Total Income|5,64,500| |
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VIA| | |
|Under section 80C (See Note 1)| | |
|- major son|19,500| |
|- self ` 22,500 restricted to 10% of ` 2,00,000|20,000|39,500|
|Under section 80D (See Note 2)| | |
|Premium paid for ` 26,000 health insurance of self and wife by cheque, restricted to|25,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

|Payment made for health check-up for parents|4,500|29,500| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Under section 80E|For payment of interest on loan taken from bank|6,500| | | |
|for MBA course of his daughter|Under section 80TTA (See Note 4)|Interest on savings bank account|14,500|10,000|85,500|
|Total Income| | |4,79,000| | |

# Notes:

1. As per section 80C, no deduction is allowed in respect of premium paid for life insurance of parents, whether they are dependent or not. Therefore, no deduction is allowable in respect of ` 25,000 paid as premium for life insurance of dependent parents of Mr. Gurnam. In respect of insurance policy issued on or after 01.04.2012, deduction shall be allowed for life insurance premium paid only to the extent of 10% of sum assured. In case the insurance policy is issued before 01.04.2012, deduction of premium paid on life insurance policy shall be allowed up to 20% of sum assured. Therefore, in the present case, deduction of ` 19,500 is allowable in full in respect of life insurance of Mr. Gurnam’s son since the insurance policy was issued before 01.04.2012 and the premium amount is less than 20% of ` 3,50,000. However, in respect of premium paid for life insurance policy of Mr. Gurnam himself, deduction is allowable only up to 10% of ` 2,00,000 since, the policy was issued on or after 01.04.2012 and the premium amount exceeds 10% of sum assured.
2. As per section 80D, in case the premium is paid in respect of health of a person specified therein and for health check-up of such person, deduction shall be allowed up to ` 25,000. Further, deduction up to ` 5,000 in aggregate shall be allowed in respect of health check-up of self, spouse, children and parents. In order to claim deduction under section 80D, the payment for health-checkup can be made in any mode including cash. However, the payment for health insurance premium has to be paid in any mode other than cash.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Therefore, in the present case, in respect of premium of ` 26,000 paid for health insurance of self and wife, deduction would be restricted to ` 25,000. Since the limit of ` 25,000 has been exhausted against medical insurance premium, no deduction is allowable for preventive health check-up for self and wife. However, deduction of ` 4,500 is allowable in respect of health check-up of his parents, since it falls within the limit of ` 5,000.

(3) No deduction shall be allowed under section 80G in case the donation is made in cash of a sum exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore, deduction under section 80G is not allowable in respect of cash donation of ` 5,000 made to an institution approved for the purpose of section 80G for promotion of family planning.

(4) As per section 80TTA, deduction shall be allowed from the gross total income of an individual or Hindu Undivided Family in respect of income by way of interest on deposit in the savings account included in the assessee’s gross total income, subject to a maximum of ` 10,000. Therefore, deduction of ` 10,000 is allowable from the gross total income of Mr. Gurnam, though the interest from savings bank account is ` 14,500.

# 5. OTHER DEDUCTIONS

Deduction in the case of a person with disability [Section 80U]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Section 80U harmonizes the criteria for defining disability as existing under the Income-tax Rules with the criteria prescribed under the Persons with Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.

(ii) Eligible assessee: This section is applicable to a resident individual, who, at any time during the previous year, is certified by the medical authority to be a person with disability. The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

(iii) Quantum of deduction: A deduction of ` 75,000 in respect of a person with disability and ` 1,25,000 in respect of a person with severe disability (having disability over 80%) is allowable under this section.

(iv) Conditions:

- (a) The assessee claiming a deduction under this section shall furnish a copy of the certificate issued by the medical authority in the form and manner, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income under section 139, in respect of the assessment year for which the deduction is claimed.
- (b) Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after the expiry of the period mentioned on the original certificate in order to continue to claim the deduction.

# DEDUCTION UNDER SECTION 10AA

A deduction of profits and gains which are derived by an assessee being an entrepreneur from the export of articles or things or providing any service, shall be allowed from the total income of the assessee.

In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The deduction would be available only under the optional tax regime, where they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.

In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be available if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/ 115BAB and section 115BAD/ 115BAE, respectively. The deduction would be available if they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.

(1) Assessees who are eligible for exemption

Exemption is available to all categories of assessees who derive any profits or gains from an undertaking, being a unit, engaged in the manufacturing or production of articles or things or provision of any service. Such assessee should be an entrepreneur referred to in section 2(j) of the SEZ Act, 2005 i.e.,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

a person who has been granted a letter of approval by the Development Commissioner under section 15(9) of the said Act.

# Essential conditions to claim exemption

The exemption shall apply to an undertaking which fulfils the following conditions:

1. It has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide any service in any SEZ during the previous year relevant to A.Y.2006-07 or any subsequent assessment year but not later than A.Y.2020-21. However, in case where letter of approval, required to be issued in accordance with the provisions of the SEZ Act, 2005, has been issued on or before 31st March, 2020 and the manufacture or production of articles or things or providing services has not begun on or before 31st March, 2020 then, the date for manufacture or production of articles or things or providing services has been extended to 31st March, 2021 or such other date after 31st March, 2021, as notified by the Central Government. For e.g. If the SEZ unit has received the necessary approval by 31.3.2020 and begins manufacture or production of articles or things or providing services on or before 31st March, 2021, then it would be deemed to have begun manufacture or production of articles or things or providing services during the A.Y. 2020-21 and would be eligible for exemption under section 10AA. [The Taxation and Other Laws (Relaxation of Certain Provisions) Act, 2020]
2. The assessee should furnish in the prescribed form, before the date specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due date for furnishing return of income u/s 139(1), the report of a chartered accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed.
3. No deduction under section 10AA would be allowed to an assessee who does not furnish a return of income on or before the due date specified u/s 139(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

Example: An individual, subject to tax audit u/s 44AB, claiming deduction u/s 10AA is required to furnish return of income on or before 31.10.2025 for A.Y. 2025-26 and the report of a chartered accountant before 30.9.2025, certifying the deduction claimed u/s 10AA.

(iv) Deduction under section 10AA would be available to a Unit, if the proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services is received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange, within a period of 6 months from the end of the previous year or, within such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf. The export proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services shall be deemed to have been received in India where such export turnover is credited to a separate account maintained for that purpose by the assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India.

Meaning of Competent authority – Competent authority means RBI or such authority as is authorized under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.

# (3) Period for which deduction is available

The unit of an entrepreneur, which begins to manufacture or produce any article or thing or provide any service in a SEZ on or after 1.4.2005, shall be allowed a deduction of:

- (i) 100% of the profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles or things or from services for a period of 5 consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or things or provide services, and
- (ii) 50% of such profits and gains for further 5 assessment years.
- (iii) So much of the amount not exceeding 50% of the profit as is debited to the profit and loss account of the previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be called the "Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account") to be created and utilised in the manner laid down under section 10AA(2) for next 5 consecutive years.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

However, Explanation below section 10AA(1) clarified that amount of deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed from the total income of the assessee computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before giving effect to the provisions of this section and the deduction under section 10AA shall not exceed such total income of the assessee.

# Example:

An undertaking is set up in a SEZ and begins manufacturing on 15.10.2010. The deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed as under:

- (a) 100% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2011-12 to A.Y.2015-16.
- (b) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2016-17 to A.Y.2020-21.
- (c) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2021-22 to A.Y.2025-26 provided certain conditions are satisfied.

# Conditions to be satisfied for claiming deduction for further 5 years (after 10 years) [Section 10AA(2)]

Sub-section (2) provides that the deduction under (3)(iii) above shall be allowed only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:

- (a) the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account is utilised-
- - (1) for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put to use before the expiry of a period of three years following the previous year in which the reserve was created; and
- (2) until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the purposes of the business of the undertaking. However, it should not be utilized for

(b) the particulars, as may be specified by the CBDT in this behalf, have been furnished by the assessee in respect of machinery or plant. Such particulars include details of the new plant/machinery, name and
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

address of the supplier of the new plant/machinery, date of acquisition and date on which new plant/machinery was first put to use. Such particulars have to be furnished along with the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such plant or machinery was first put to use.

# (5) Consequences of mis-utilisation/ non-utilisation of reserve [Section 10AA(3)]

Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account -

- (a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-section (2), the amount so utilized shall be deemed to be the profits in the year in which the amount was so utilised and charged to tax accordingly; or
- (b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the said period of 3 years, the amount not so utilised, shall be deemed to be the profits in the year immediately following the said period of three years and be charged to tax accordingly.

# (6) Computation of profits and gains from exports of such undertakings

The profits derived from export of articles or things or services (including computer software) shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business of the undertaking, being the unit, the same proportion as the export turnover in respect of such articles or things or services bears to the total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking i.e.

Profits of Unit in SEZ x Export turnover of Unit SEZ

Total turnover of Unit SEZ

# Clarification on issues relating to export of computer software

Section 10AA provides deduction to assessees who derive any profits and gains from export of articles or things or services (including computer software) from the year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, subject to fulfillment of the prescribed conditions. The profits and gains derived from the on site development of computer software (including services for development of software) outside India shall be deemed to be the profits and gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Meaning of Export turnover: It means the consideration in respect of export by the undertaking being the unit of articles or things or services received in India or brought into India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange within 6 months from the end of the previous year or within such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf. However, it does not include:

- freight
- telecommunication charges
- insurance

attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India or expenses incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (including computer software) outside India.

# Clarification on issues relating to deduction of freight, telecommunication charges and other expenses from total turnover

"Export turnover", inter alia, does not include freight, telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (including computer software) outside India. CBDT has, vide circular No. 4/2018, dated 14/08/2018, clarified that freight, telecommunication charges and insurance expenses are to be excluded both from "export turnover" and "total turnover", while working out deduction admissible under section 10AA to the extent they are attributable to the delivery of articles or things outside India. Similarly, expenses incurred in foreign exchange for rendering services outside India are to be excluded from both "export turnover" and "total turnover" while computing deduction admissible under section 10AA.

# (7) Restriction on other tax benefits

(i) The business loss under section 72(1) or loss under the head “Capital Gains” under section 74(1), in so far as such loss relates to the business of the undertaking, being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried forward or set off.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

(ii) During the period of deduction, depreciation is deemed to have been allowed on the assets. Written Down Value shall accordingly be reduced.

(iii) No deduction under section 80-IA and 80-IB7 shall be allowed in relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking.

(iv) Where any goods or services held for the purposes of eligible business are transferred to any other business carried on by the assessee, or where any goods held for any other business are transferred to the eligible business and, in either case, if the consideration for such transfer as recorded in the accounts of the eligible business does not correspond to the market value thereof, then the profits eligible for deduction shall be computed by adopting market value of such goods or services on the date of transfer. In case of exceptional difficulty in this regard, the profits shall be computed by the Assessing Officer on a reasonable basis as he may deem fit. Similarly, where due to the close connection between the assessee and the other person or for any other reason, it appears to the Assessing Officer that the profits of eligible business is increased to more than the ordinary profits, the Assessing Officer shall compute the amount of profits of such eligible business on a reasonable basis for allowing the deduction.

(v) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in relation to any specified business eligible for investment-linked deduction under section 35AD, no deduction shall be allowed under section 35AD in relation to such specified business for the same or any other assessment year.

# Deduction allowable in case of amalgamation and demerger

In the event of any undertaking, being the Unit which is entitled to deduction under this section, being transferred, before the expiry of the period specified in this section, to another undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme of amalgamation or demerger, -

(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the amalgamating or the demerged Unit for the previous year in which the amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and

7 Deduction under section sections 80-IA and 80-IB are dealt with at Final Level

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

(b) the provisions of this section would apply to the amalgamated or resulting Unit, as they would have applied to the amalgamating or the demerged Unit had the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place.

# ILLUSTRATION 21

Mr. Y furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.3.2025:

|Particulars|` (in lacs)|
|---|---|
|Total turnover of Unit A located in Special Economic Zone|100|
|Profit of the business of Unit A|30|
|Export turnover of Unit A received in India in convertible foreign exchange on or before 30.9.2025|50|
|Total turnover of Unit B located in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA)|200|
|Profit of the business of Unit B|20|

Compute deduction under section 10AA for the A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that Mr. Y commenced operations in SEZ and DTA in the year 2019-20 and Mr. Y has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# SOLUTION

50% of the profit derived from export of articles or things or services is eligible for deduction under section 10AA, since F.Y. 2024-25 is the sixth year commencing from the year of manufacture or production of articles or things or provision of services by the Unit in SEZ. As per section 10AA(7), the profit derived from export of articles or things or services shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business of the undertaking, being the Unit, the same proportion as the export turnover in respect of articles or things or services bears to the total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking.

Deduction under section 10AA = Profit of the business of Unit A x Export Turnover of Unit A x 50% / Total Turnover of Unit A

= ` 30 lakhs x 50 x 50% = ` 7.5 lakhs

Note – No deduction under section 10AA is allowable in respect of profits of business of Unit B located in DTA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.87

# LET US RECAPITULATE

# Deductions in respect of certain payments

|Section|Eligible Assessee|Eligible Payments|Permissible Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|80C|Individual or HUF|Contribution to PPF, Payment of LIC premium, etc. Sums paid or deposited in the previous year by way of - Life insurance premium - Contribution to PPF/ SPF/RPF and approved superannuation fund - Repayment of housing loan taken from Govt., bank, LIC, specified employer etc. - Tuition fees to any Indian university, college, school for full-time education of any two children - Term deposit for a fixed period of not less than 5 years with|Sum paid or deposited, subject to a maximum of ` 1,50,000 [Deduction would be available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]|

# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Schedule Bank

- Subscription to notified bonds of NABARD
- Five year post office time deposit
- Senior Citizen’s Savings Scheme Account etc.
- Contribution by Central Govt. employee to additional account (Tier II A/c) of NPS referred to u/s 80CCD

# 80CCC

Individual Contribution to certain pension funds subject to a maximum of ` 1,50,000

Any amount paid or deposited to keep in force a contract for any annuity plan of LIC of India or any other insurer for receiving pension from the fund.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

# 80CCD

Individuals employed by the Central Government or any other employer; Any other individual assessee.

An individual deduction of own contribution u/s 80CCD(1) is restricted to 10% of his salary in case of a salaried individual.

In any other case, deduction u/s 80CCD(1) is restricted to 20% of gross total income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.89 being an individual, who has paid or deposited any amount in his account under a notified pension scheme [to his individual pension account [Tier I A/c] under National Pension Scheme & Atal Pension Yojana]

Further, additional deduction of upto ` 50,000 is available u/s 80CCD(1B). [Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) and 80CCD(1B) would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

# Employer’s Contribution

The entire employer’s contribution would be included in the salary of the employee. The deduction of employer’s contribution under section 80CCD(2) would be restricted to 14% of salary, where the employer is the Central Government or State Government; and 10% of salary (14% under default tax regime), in case of any other employer. [Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) would be available irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.]

Note – As per section 80CCE, maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C, 80CCC & 80CCD(1) is ` 1,50,000. However, the limit ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE does not apply to deduction under section 80CCD(2) and 80CCD(1B).

# 80CCH Individual Contribution to Agniveer Corpus Fund

Whole of the amount paid or deposited [Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

An individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme and subscribing to the Agniveer Corpus Fund on or after
# INCOME TAX LAW

1.11.2022, who has Central Government’s paid or deposited any amount in his account in the Agniveer Corpus Fund. The entire Central Government’s contribution to the Agniveer Corpus Fund would be included in the salary of the assessee. Thereafter, deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available for the same. [Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax]

# 80D Individual Medical Insurance and HUF Premium

1. Any premium paid, otherwise than by way of cash, to keep in force an insurance on the health of –
- in case of self, an individual and dependent children
- in case of family HUF member

Maximum ` 25,000 (` 50,000, in case the individual or his or her spouse is a senior citizen)
2. In case of an individual, contribution, otherwise than by way of cash, to CGHS or any other scheme as notified by Central Government.
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.91

# (3)

Any premium paid, otherwise than by way of cash, to keep in force an insurance on the health of parents, whether or not dependent on the individual.

|Maximum|₹ 25,000|
|---|---|
|(₹ 50,000, in case either or both of the parents are senior citizen(s))|(₹ 50,000, in case either or both of the parents are senior citizen(s))|

# Notes:

(i) Any amount paid, otherwise than by way of cash, on account of medical expenditure incurred on the health of the assessee or his family member or his parent, who is a senior citizen and no amount has been paid to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of such person.

Amount paid subject to a cap of ₹ 50,000 (in case one parent is a senior citizen, in respect of whom insurance premium is paid, and the other is a senior citizen on whom medical expenditure is incurred, the total deduction cannot exceed ₹ 50,000)

(ii) Payment, including cash payment, for preventive health check up of himself, spouse, dependent children and parents.

Amount paid subject to a cap of ₹ 5,000, in aggregate (subject to the overall individual limits of ₹ 25,000/ ₹ 50,000, as the case may be)

[Deduction would be available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 80DD

Resident Individual or HUF

Maintenance including medical treatment of a dependant disabled

Flat deduction of ` 75,000.

In case of severe disability (i.e. person with 80% or more disability) the flat deduction shall be ` 1,25,000.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

# Any amount incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training and rehabilitation of a dependent disabled

# and / or

# Any amount paid or deposited under the scheme framed in this behalf by the LIC or any other insurer or Administrator or Specified Company and approved by Board.

# Meaning of Dependant

|(1)|(2)|
|---|---|
|In case of|Dependant|
|An individual|Spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters|
|A HUF|Any member|

Persons mentioned in column (2) should be wholly or mainly dependant on the person mentioned in corresponding column (1) for support.
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.93 maintenance. Such persons should not have claimed deduction under section 80U in computing total income of that year.

# 80DDB

Resident Individual or HUF

Deduction for Actual sum paid or medical treatment of specified diseases or ailments

|Amount paid for specified diseases or ailment|Assessee Amount spent|
|---|---|
|₹ 40,000 (₹ 1,00,000, if the payment is for medical treatment of a senior citizen)|whichever is less, minus the amount received from the insurance company or reimbursed by the employer.|

[Deduction would be available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime being provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

An individual or his dependant spouse, children, parents, brothers or sisters wholly or mainly dependant on the individual for support and maintenance

# A HUF

For any member

# 80E

Individual

Interest on loan taken for higher education

The deduction is available for interest payment in the initial assessment year (year of commencement of interest payment) and seven assessment years
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

approved charitable institution. Such loan is taken for pursuing his higher education or higher education of his relative i.e., spouse or children of the individual or the student for whom the individual is the legal guardian. until the interest is paid in full by the assessee, whichever is earlier.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

|80EE|Individuals|Deduction for interest on loan borrowed from any financial institution [bank/housing finance company (HFC)]|
|---|---|---|
|Conditions:|Conditions:|Conditions:|
|Loan should be sanctioned during P.Y.2016-17|Loan should be sanctioned during P.Y.2016-17|Loan should be sanctioned during P.Y.2016-17|
|Loan sanctioned ≤ ` 35 lakhs|Value of house ≤ ` 50 lakhs|The assessee should not own any residential house on the date of sanction of loan.|
|[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]|[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]|[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]|

|80EEA|Individual|Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken from a FI (bank or HFC) for acquisition of residential house property.|
|---|---|---|
|Deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 would be allowed in respect of interest payable on loan taken from a FI for acquisition of house property.|Deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 would be allowed in respect of interest payable on loan taken from a FI for acquisition of house property.|Deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 would be allowed in respect of interest payable on loan taken from a FI for acquisition of house property.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.95

# Conditions:

- Loan should be sanctioned by a FI during the period between 1st April 2019 to 31st March 2022.
- Stamp Duty Value of house ≤ ` 45 lakhs
- The individual should not own any residential house on the date of sanction of loan.
- The individual should not be eligible to claim deduction u/s 80EE.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

# 80EEB

Individual Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken from a FI (bank or certain NBFCs) for purchase of electric vehicle.

Deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 would be allowed in respect of interest payable on loan taken for purchase of a electric vehicle.

Loan should be sanctioned by a FI during the period from 1.4.2019 to 31.3.2023.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 80G

All assessees Donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc.

There are four categories of deductions –

|Category|Donee|
|---|---|
|(I) 100% deduction of amount donated, without any qualifying limit|Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund, National Children’s Fund, Swachh Bharat Kosh, National Defence Fund, PM CARES Fund etc.|
|(II) 50% deduction of amount donated, without any qualifying limit|Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund.|
|(III) 100% deduction of amount donated, subject to qualifying limit|Government or local authority, institution for promotion of family planning etc.|
|(IV) 50% deduction of amount donated, subject to qualifying limit|Government or any local authority to be used for charitable purpose, other than promotion of family planning, notified temple, church, gurudwara, mosque etc.|

# Calculation of Qualifying limit for Category III & IV donations:

Step 1: Compute adjusted total income, i.e., the gross total income as reduced by the following:

1. Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except u/s 80G
2. Short term capital gains taxable u/s 111A
3. Long term capital gains taxable u/s 112 & 112A

Step 2: Calculate 10% of adjusted total income.

Step 3: Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to qualifying limit.

Step 4: Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum permissible deduction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.97

# Step 5:

The said deduction is adjusted first against donations qualifying for 100% deduction (i.e., Category III donations). Thereafter, 50% of balance qualifies for deduction under section 80G.

Note - No deduction shall be allowed for donation in excess of ` 2,000, if paid in cash.

[In case of individuals, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# 80GG

Individual Rent paid for residential accommodation not in receipt of house rent allowance

Least of the following is allowable as deduction:

- (1) 25% of total income;
- (2) Rent paid – 10% of total income
- (3) ` 5,000 p.m.

No deduction if any residential accommodation is owned by the assessee/his spouse/minor child/HUF at the place where he ordinarily resides or performs the duties of his office or employment or carries on his business or profession.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

# 80GGA

Any assessee not having income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”

Donations for scientific research and rural development

Actual donation

[No deduction shall be allowed for donation in excess of ` 2,000, if paid in cash]
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

and gains of business or profession”

[Deduction would be available to individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person only if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

|80GGB|Indian company|Contributions to political parties|Actual contribution (otherwise than by way of cash)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(not opting for section 115BAA/115BAB)|Any sum contributed by it to a registered political party or an electoral trust.| | |
|80GGC|Any person, other than local authority and an artificial juridical person funded by the Government.|Contributions to political parties|Actual contribution (otherwise than by way of cash)|
| |Amount contributed to a registered political party or an electoral trust.|[An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI would be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGC only if the assessee exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]| |

# Deductions in respect of Certain Incomes

As per section 80AC, furnishing return of income on or before due date is mandatory for claiming deduction in respect of certain incomes.

|Section|Eligible Assessee|Eligible Income|Permissible Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|80JJAA|An assessee to whom section 44AB applies,|Deduction in respect of employment of new employees|30% of additional employee cost incurred in the previous year.|
| | |Deduction is allowable for 3 assessment years including assessment year relevant to| |

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

whose Gross total income includes profits and gains derived from business

|80QQB|Resident individual, being an author|Royalty income, etc., of authors of certain books other than text books|
|---|---|---|
|Consideration for assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book, being a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature or royalty or copyright fee received as lumpsum or otherwise.|Consideration for assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book, being a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature or royalty or copyright fee received as lumpsum or otherwise.|Consideration for assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book, being a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature or royalty or copyright fee received as lumpsum or otherwise.|

|80RRB|Resident individual, being a patentee|Royalty on patents|
|---|---|---|
|Any income by way of a royalty on patents registered on or after 1.4.2003|Any income by way of a royalty on patents registered on or after 1.4.2003|Any income by way of a royalty on patents registered on or after 1.4.2003|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.99 the previous year in which such employment is provided.

[Deduction would be available irrespective of the regime under which the employer pays tax]

Income derived in the exercise of profession or ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.

In respect of royalty or copyright fee received otherwise than by way of lumpsum, income to be restricted to 15% of value of books sold during the relevant previous year.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

Whole of such income or ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.

[Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# Deductions in respect of Other Income

|Section|Eligible Assessee|Eligible Income|Permissible Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|80TTA|Individual or a HUF, other than a resident senior citizen|Interest on deposits in savings account|Actual interest subject to a maximum of ` 10,000. [Deduction would be available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]|
|80TTB|Resident senior citizen (i.e. an individual of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the previous year)|Interest on deposits (both fixed deposits and saving accounts) with banking company, co-operative society engaged in the business of banking or a post office.|Actual interest or ` 50,000, whichever is less. [Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]|

# Other Deductions

|Section|Eligible Assessee|Condition for deduction|Permissible Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|80U|Resident Individual|Deduction in case of a person with disability|Flat deduction of ` 75,000, in case of a person with disability. Flat deduction of ` 1,25,000, in case of a person with severe disability (80% or more disability). [Deduction would be available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.101

# Deduction under section 10AA

|Section|Eligible Assessee|Eligible Income|Permissible Deduction|
|---|---|---|---|
|10AA|An assessee who derives profits from an under-taking, being a Unit established in SEZ, which begins to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide any service on or after 1.4.2005 but before 1.4.2021|Profits derived from exports of such articles or things or export of services (including computer software).|Deduction for 15 consecutive assessment years Amount of deduction = Profits of Unit in SEZ x Export turnover of Unit SEZ Total turnover of Unit SEZ|

Conditions for deduction:

1. Proceeds to be received in convertible foreign exchange within 6 months from the end of the P.Y. or such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.
2. The report of chartered accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed should be furnished before the date specified in section 44AB.
3. Return of income to be filed on or before due date u/s 139(1).

Years 1 to 5 - 100% of such profits would be exempt in the first five years;

Years 6 to 10 - 50% of such profits in the next five years; and

Years 11 to 15 - In the last five years, 50% of such profits subject to transfer to SEZ Re-investment Reserve Account.

[In case of individuals, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society), BoI or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:
1. During the financial year 2024-25, Mr. Amit paid interest on loan availed by him for his son's higher education. His son is already employed in a firm. Mr. Amit will get the deduction under section 80E.
2. Subscription to notified bonds of NABARD would qualify for deduction under section 80C.
3. In order to be eligible to claim deduction under section 80C, investment/contribution/subscription etc. in eligible or approved modes, should be made from out of income chargeable to tax.
4. Where an individual repays a sum of ₹ 30,000 towards principal and ₹ 14,000 as interest in respect of loan taken from a bank for pursuing eligible higher studies, the deduction allowable under section 80E is ₹ 44,000 irrespective of the tax regime.
5. Mrs. Sheela, widow of Mr. Satish (who was an employee of M/s. XYZ Ltd.), received ₹ 7 lakhs on 1.5.2024, being amount standing to the credit of Mr. Satish in his NPS Account, in respect of which deduction has been allowed under section 80CCD to Mr. Satish in the earlier previous years. Such amount received by her as a nominee on closure of the account is deemed to be her income for A.Y.2025-26.
6. Mr. Vishal, a Central Government employee, contributed ₹ 50,000 towards Tier II account of NPS. The same would be eligible for deduction under section 80CCD. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. Examine the allowability of the following if the assessees have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

(i) Rajan, a resident individual, has to pay to a hospital for treatment ` 62,000 and spent nothing for life insurance or for maintenance of dependent disabled.

(ii) Varun, a resident Indian, has spent nothing for treatment in the previous year and deposited ` 25,000 with LIC for maintenance of dependant disabled.

(iii) Hari, a resident individual, has incurred ` 20,000 for treatment and ` 25,000 was deposited with LIC for maintenance of dependant disabled.

# 3.

For the A.Y. 2025-26, the Gross total income of Mr. Chaturvedi, a resident in India, was ` 8,18,240 which includes long-term capital gain of ` 2,45,000 taxable under section 112 and Short-term capital gain of ` 58,000. The Gross total income also includes interest income of ` 12,000 from savings bank deposits with banks and ` 40,000 interest on fixed deposits with banks. Mr. Chaturvedi has invested in PPF ` 1,20,000 and also paid a medical insurance premium ` 51,000. Mr. Chaturvedi also contributed ` 50,000 to Public Charitable Trust eligible for deduction under section 80G by way of an account payee cheque. Compute the total income and tax thereon of Mr. Chaturvedi, who is 70 years old as on 31.3.2025, in a tax efficient manner.

# 4.

Mr. Rajmohan whose gross total income was ` 6,40,000 for the financial year 2024-25, furnishes you the following information:

(i) Repayment of loan taken from SBI for acquisition of residential house (self-occupied) - ` 50,000.

(ii) Five year post office time deposit - ` 20,000.

(iii) Donation to a recognized charitable trust ` 25,000 which is eligible for deduction under section 80G at the applicable rate.

(iv) Interest on loan taken for higher education of spouse paid during the year - ` 10,000.

Compute the total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y. 2025-26 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 5.

Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y. 2025-26 of Ms. Roma, aged 40 years, who has a gross total income of ` 15,00,000 for the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

A.Y. 2025-26 and has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). She provides the following information about her investments/payments during the P.Y. 2024-25:

|Sl. No.|Particulars|Amount (`)|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Life Insurance premium paid (Policy taken on 31-03-2012 and sum assured is ` 4,70,000)|35,000|
|2.|Public Provident Fund contribution|1,50,000|
|3.|Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila Bank, Bangalore|20,000|
|4.|Payment to L.I.C. Pension Fund|1,40,000|
|5.|Mediclaim Policy taken for self, wife and dependent children, premium paid by cheque|30,000|
|6.|Medical Insurance premium paid by cheque for parents (Senior Citizens)|52,000|

Mr. Rudra has one unit at Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and other unit at Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). He provides the following details for the previous year 2024-25.

|Particulars|Mr. Rudra (`)|Unit in DTA (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Total Sales|6,00,00,000|2,00,00,000|
|Export Sales|5,60,00,000|1,60,00,000|
|Net Profit|80,00,000|20,00,000|

Proceeds from export sales in SEZ received in convertible foreign exchange by 30.9.2025 is ` 3,00,00,000. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Calculate the eligible deduction under section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for the Assessment Year 2025-26 if both the units were set up and start manufacturing from 22-05-2016.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

6.105

# ANSWERS

1. (i) The statement is correct. The deduction under section 80E is available to an individual in respect of interest on loan taken for his higher education or for the higher education of his relative only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). For this purpose, relative means, inter alia, spouse and children of the individual. Therefore, Mr. Amit will get the deduction under section 80E in respect of interest on loan availed by him for his son’s higher education, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is immaterial that his son is already employed in a firm. This would not affect Mr. Amit’s eligibility for deduction under section 80E.
2. (ii) The statement is correct. Under section 80C(2) subscription to such bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette) would qualify for deduction under section 80C, if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
3. (iii) The statement is not correct. There is no stipulation under section 80C that the investment, subscription, etc. should be made from out of income chargeable to tax.
4. (iv) The statement is not correct. An individual would not be eligible for deduction u/s 80E if he pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC. If he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), deduction under section 80E would be available in respect of interest paid on education loan. Hence, the deduction will be limited to interest of ` 14,000, if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
5. (v) The statement is not correct. The proviso to section 80CCD(3) provides that the amount received by the nominee, on closure of NPS account on the death of the assessee, shall not be deemed to be the income of the nominee. Hence, amount received by Mrs. Sheela would not be deemed to be her income for A.Y. 2025-26.
6. (vi) The statement is not correct. Contribution to Tier II account of NPS would qualify for deduction under section 80C and not section 80CCD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 6.106 INCOME TAX LAW

1. (i) The deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD is allowable to Rajan, irrespective of the amount of expenditure incurred or paid by him. If the expenditure is incurred in respect of a dependant with severe disability, the deduction allowable is ` 1,25,000.
2. (ii) The assessee Varun has deposited ` 25,000 for maintenance of dependent disabled. He is, however, eligible to claim ` 75,000 since the deduction of ` 75,000 is allowed, irrespective of the amount deposited with LIC. In the case of dependant with severe disability, the deduction allowable is ` 1,25,000.
3. (iii) Section 80DD allows a deduction of ` 75,000 irrespective of the actual amount spent on maintenance of a dependent disabled and/or actual amount deposited with LIC. Therefore, the deduction will be ` 75,000 even though the total amount incurred/deposited is only ` 45,000. If the dependant is a person with severe disability the quantum of deduction is ` 1,25,000.

# 3. Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Gross total income incl. long term capital gain|8,18,240|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A|-|
|No deduction would be available under default tax regime u/s 115BAC| |
|Total income|8,18,240|
|Tax on total income| |
|LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20%|49,000|
|Balance total income ` 5,73,240|13,662|
| |62,662|
|Add: Health and Education cess @4%|2,506|
|Total tax liability|65,168|
|Total tax liability (Rounded off)|65,170|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

# 6.107

# Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2025-26 under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross total income incl. long term capital gain|8,18,240| |
|Less: Long term capital gain|2,45,000| |
| |5,73,240| |
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A| | |
|Under section 80C in respect of PPF deposit|1,20,000| |
|Under section 80D (it is assumed that premium of|50,000| |
|` 51,000 is paid by otherwise than by cash. The deduction would be restricted to|50,000| |
|since Mr. Chaturvedi is a senior citizen)| | |
|Under section 80G (See Notes 1 & 2 below)|17,662| |
|Under section 80TTB (See Note 3 below)|50,000|2,37,662|
|Total income (excluding long term capital gains)|3,35,578| |
|Total income (including long term capital gains)|5,80,578| |
|Total income (rounded off)|5,80,580| |
|Tax on total income (including long-term capital gains of ` 2,45,000)| | |
|LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20%|49,000|a|
|Balance total income ` 3,35,580 (See Note 4 below)|1,779| |
| |50,779| |
|Add: Health and Education cess @4%|2,031| |
|Total tax liability|52,810| |

Since the tax liability is lower under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act) as compared to the default tax regime, Mr. Chaturvedi should exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# Notes:

1. Computation of deduction under section 80G:
|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Gross total income (excluding long term capital gains)|5,73,240|
|Less: Deduction under section 80C, 80D & 80TTB|2,20,000|
| |3,53,240|
|10% of the above|35,324|
|Contribution made|50,000|
|Lower of the two eligible for deduction under section 80G|35,324|
|Deduction under section 80G – 50% of ₹ 35,324|17,662|
2. Deduction under section 80G is allowed only if amount is paid by any mode other than cash, in case of amount exceeding ₹ 2,000. Therefore, the contribution made to public charitable trust is eligible for deduction since it is made by way of an account payee cheque.
3. Deduction of upto ₹ 50,000 under section 80TTB is allowed to a senior citizen if gross total income includes interest income on bank deposits, both fixed deposits and savings account.
4. Mr. Chaturvedi, being a senior citizen is eligible for a higher basic exemption of ₹ 3,00,000.

# Computation of total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|₹|₹|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Total Income|6,40,000| |
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A| | |
|Under section 80C| | |
|Repayment of loan taken for acquisition of residential house|50,000| |
|Five year time deposit with Post Office|20,000|70,000|
|Under section 80E| | |
|Interest on loan taken for higher education of spouse, being a relative.|10,000| |

# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

Under section 80G (See Note below)

Donation to recognized charitable trust (50% of ` 25,000) 12,500 92,500

Total Income 5,47,500

Note: In case of deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to a charitable trust, the net qualifying amount has to be restricted to 10% of adjusted total income, i.e., gross total income less deductions under Chapter VI-A except 80G. The adjusted total income is, therefore, ` 5,60,000 (i.e. 6,40,000 – ` 80,000), 10% of which is ` 56,000, which is higher than the actual donation of ` 25,000. Therefore, the deduction under section 80G would be ` 12,500, being 50% of the actual donation of ` 25,000.

# 5. Computation of eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A of Ms. Roma for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Deduction under section 80C|Life insurance premium paid ` 35,000|35,000|
|(allowed in full since the same is within the limit of 20% of the sum assured, the policy being taken before 1.4.2012)|Public Provident Fund|1,50,000|
|Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila Bank, Bangalore|20,000|a|
| |2,05,000| |
|Restricted to a maximum of ` 1,50,000|1,50,000| |
|Deduction under section 80CCC for payment towards LIC pension fund|1,40,000| |
| |2,90,000| |
|As per section 80CCE, aggregate deduction under, inter alia, section 80C and 80CCC, is restricted to|1,50,000| |
|Deduction under section 80D|Payment of medical insurance premium of ` 30,000 towards medical policy taken for self, wife and dependent children restricted to|25,000|

# 6

# INCOME TAX LAW

Medical insurance premium paid ` 52,000 for parents, being senior citizens, restricted to 50,000 75,000 Eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A 2,25,000 a

# 6. Computation of deduction u/s 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961

As per section 10AA, in computing the total income of Mr. Rudra from his unit located in a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which begins to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide any services during the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on or after 01.04.2006 but before 01.04.2021, there shall be allowed a deduction of 100% of the profit and gains derived from export of such articles or things or from services for a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, and 50% of such profits for further five assessment years.

Since Mr. Rudra has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for deduction u/s 10AA.

The deduction u/s 10AA would be available only if Mr. Rudra furnishes report of chartered accountant before the date specified in section 44AB and files return of income on or before due date u/s 139(1).

Since A.Y. 2025-26 is the 9ᵗʰ assessment year from A.Y. 2017-18, relevant to the previous year 2016-17, in which the SEZ unit began manufacturing of articles or things, it shall be eligible for deduction of 50% of the profits derived from export of such articles or things, assuming all the other conditions specified in section 10AA are fulfilled.

|Export turnover of Unit in SEZ|x|50%|
|---|---|---|
|= Profits of Unit in SEZ|x|Total turnover of Unit in SEZ|
|300 lakhs|x|50% = ` 22.50 lakhs|
|= 60 lakhs|x|400 lakhs|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME

Export turnover of Unit in SEZ is the export sales in SEZ received in convertible foreign exchange by 30.9.2025 which is ` 3,00,00,000. The unit set up in Domestic Tariff Area is not eligible for the benefit of deduction u/s 10AA in respect of its export profits, in both the situations.

# Working Note:

# Computation of total sales, export sales and net profit of unit in SEZ

|Particulars|Rudra Ltd. (`)|Unit in DTA (`)|Unit in SEZ (`)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Total Sales|6,00,00,000|2,00,00,000|4,00,00,000|
|Export Sales|4,60,00,000|1,60,00,000|3,00,00,000|
|Net Profit|80,00,000|20,00,000|60,00,000|

# CHAPTER 7

# ADVANCE TAX, TAX DEDUCTION AT SOURCE AND TAX COLLECTION AT SOURCE

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to–

- appreciate the modes of recovery of income-tax from an assessee;
- comprehend and apply the provisions governing deduction of tax at source from certain specified income and payments;
- examine whether tax is deductible in a particular case(s) considering the provisions of the relevant section;
- compute the tax deductible at source in respect of a particular case(s);
- identify the cases where tax is not required to be deducted at source and the conditions to be satisfied for this purpose;
- comprehend and appreciate the duty of the person deducting tax;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.2 INCOME TAX LAW

- examine the consequences of failure to deduct tax at source or make payment of the tax deducted at source;
- appreciate when the liability to pay advance tax arises;
- compute advance tax liability and the schedule of instalments for payment of advance tax;
- comprehend the concept of tax collection at source and appreciate when tax is collectible at source;
- appreciate the difference between tax deduction at source and tax collection at source.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

|Tax deduction at source|Advance Tax|Tax collection at source|
|---|---|---|
|Deduction of tax at source|Liability to pay advance tax|Collection of tax at source|
|[Section 192 to 196]|[Section 207 to 208]|[Section 206C]|
|Certificate of deduction of tax at a lower rate|Computation of advance tax|TCS for non-filers of income-tax return and non-furnishers of PAN|
|[Section 197]|[Section 209]|[Section 206CCA & 206CC]|
|No deduction of tax in certain cases|Instalments of advance tax and due dates|Difference between TDS and TCS|
|[Section 197A]|[Section 211]|Common Number for TDS and TCS|
|Miscellaneous Provisions|Credit for advance tax| |
|[Section 198 to 206AB]|[Section 219]| |
|Interest on non-payment / short payment or deferment of advance tax| | |
|[Section 234B & 234C]| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.4 INCOME TAX LAW

# 1. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE AND ADVANCE PAYMENT [SECTION 190]

The total income of an assessee for the previous year is taxable in the relevant assessment year. For example, the total income for the P.Y. 2024-25 is taxable in the A.Y. 2025-26. However, income-tax is recovered from the assessee in the previous year itself through –

1. Tax deduction at source (TDS)
2. Tax collection at source (TCS)
3. Payment of advance tax

Another mode of recovery of tax is from the employer through tax paid by him under section 192(1A) on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the employee.

These taxes are deductible from the total tax due from the assessee. The assessee, while filing his return of income, has to pay self-assessment tax under section 140A, if tax is due on the total income as per his return of income after adjusting, inter alia, TDS, TCS, relief of tax claimed under section 89, tax credit claimed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), any tax or interest payable according to the provisions of section 191(2) and advance tax.

# 2. DIRECT PAYMENT [SECTION 191]

Direct payment of tax - Section 191(1) provides that in the following cases, tax is payable by the assessee directly –

1. in the case of income in respect of which tax is not required to be deducted at source; and
2. income in respect of which tax is liable to be deducted but is not actually deducted.

In view of this provision, the proceedings for recovery of tax necessarily had to be taken against the assessee whose tax was liable to be deducted, but not deducted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

In order to overcome this difficulty, the Explanation to this section provides that if any person, including the principal officer of a company –

1. who is required to deduct tax at source; or
2. an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A),

does not deduct, or after deducting fails to pay such tax, or does not pay, the whole or part of the tax, then, such person shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-default.

However, if the assessee himself has paid the tax, this provision will not apply.

# 3. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE

# 3.1 Salary [Section 192]

1. Applicability of TDS under section 192
This section casts an obligation on every person responsible for paying any income chargeable to tax under the head ‘Salaries’ to deduct income-tax at the time of payment on the amount payable.
2. Manner of deduction of tax
1. Such income-tax has to be calculated at the average rate of income-tax computed on the basis of the rates in force for the relevant financial year in which the payment is made, on the estimated total income of the assessee where the employee intimates to the employer his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. Average rate of income-tax means the rate arrived at by dividing the amount of income-tax calculated on the total income, by such total income.
3. A deductor, being an employer, has to seek information from each of its employees having income under section 192 regarding their intended tax regime and each such employee would intimate the same to the deductor, being his employer, regarding his intended tax regime for each year and upon intimation, the deductor has to compute his total income, and deduct tax at source thereon according to the option exercised.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.6 INCOME TAX LAW

If intimation is not made by the employee, it would be presumed that the employee continues to be in the default tax regime u/s 115BAC and has not exercised the option to opt out of the default tax regime. Accordingly, in such a case, the employer has to deduct tax at source, on income under section 192, in accordance with the rates provided under section 115BAC(1A).

It is also clarified that the intimation would not amount to exercising option under section 115BAC(6) and the person shall be required to do so separately in accordance with the provisions of that section [Circular No. 4/2023 dated 5.4.2023].

(iv) The concept of payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites has been provided in sections 192(1A) and (1B). These sections provide that the employer may pay this tax, at his option, in lieu of deduction of tax at source from salary payable to the employee. Such tax will have to be worked out at the average rate applicable to aggregate salary income of the employee and payment of tax will have to be made every month along with tax deducted at source on monetary payment of salary, allowances etc.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. A, the employer, pays gross salary including allowances and monetary perquisites amounting to ` 7,30,000 to his General Manager. Besides, the employer provides non-monetary perquisites to him whose value is estimated at ` 1,20,000. The General Manager is exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. What is the tax implication in the hands of Mr. A, the employer and General Manager, the employee?

# SOLUTION

|Gross salary, allowances and monetary perquisites|7,30,000|
|---|---|
|Non-Monetary perquisites|1,20,000|
|Total|8,50,000|
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)|50,000|
|Net Total|8,00,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Tax Liability: 75,400

Average rate of tax (` 75,400 / ` 8,00,000 × 100): 9.425%

Mr. A can deduct ` 75,400 at source from the salary of the General Manager at the time of payment.

Alternatively, Mr. A can pay tax on non-monetary perquisites as under –

Tax on non-monetary perquisites = 9.425% of ` 1,20,000 = ` 11,310

Balance to be deducted from salary = ` 64,090

If Mr. A pays tax of ` 11,310 on non-monetary perquisites, the same is not a deductible expenditure as per section 40(a). The amount of tax paid towards non-monetary perquisite by the employer, however, is not chargeable to tax in the hands of the employee as per section 10(10CC).

(v) In cases where an assessee is employed simultaneously under more than one employer or the assessee takes up a job with another employer during the financial year after his resignation or retirement from the services of the former employer, he may furnish the details of the income under the head “Salaries” due or received by him from the other employer, the tax deducted therefrom and such other particulars to his current employer. Thereupon, the subsequent employer should take such information into consideration and then deduct the tax remaining payable in respect of the employee’s remuneration from both the employers put together for the relevant financial year.

(vi) In respect of salary payments to employees of Government or to employees of companies, co-operative societies, local authorities, universities, institutions, associations or bodies, deduction of tax at source should be made after allowing relief u/s 89, where eligible.

(vii) A tax payer receiving salary has, in addition, other income chargeable to tax for that financial year, may send to the employer, the following particulars of:

- (a) such other income and of any tax deducted under any other provision;
- (b) loss, if any, under the head ‘Income from house property’ if the assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.8 INCOME TAX LAW

option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

The employer shall take the above particulars into account while calculating tax deductible at source.

To avoid the cash flow issues for employees, the scope of section 192(1B) has been extended to include any tax deducted or collected at source to be taken into account for the purposes of making the deduction under section 192. Accordingly, w.e.f. 1.10.2024, an employee can inform his employer for a financial year, the details of the following:

- (a) such other income chargeable to tax (not being a loss under any such head;
- (b) any tax deducted or collected under any other provision of the Act;
- (c) loss, if any, under the head “Income from house property” if the assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A),

in prescribed form and manner and thereupon the person responsible to deduct tax shall take into account the above particulars while calculating tax deductible at source.

However, it has to be noted that on account of submission of the above details, the tax deducted at source on salaries should not be reduced except with respect to loss from house property (allowable to the extent of ` 2,00,000) and tax deducted at source and tax collected at source.

# (3) Furnishing of statement of particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of salary by employer to employee

The employer shall furnish to the employee, a statement in Form No. 12BA giving correct and complete particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of salary provided to him and the value thereof. The statement shall be in the prescribed form and manner. This requirement is applicable only where the salary paid/payable to an employee exceeds ` 1,50,000. For other
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Employees, the particulars of perquisites/profits in lieu of salary shall be given in Form 16 itself.

# (4) Circular issued by CBDT

Every year, the CBDT issues a circular giving details and direction to all employers for the purpose of deduction of tax from salaries payable to the employees during the relevant financial year. These instructions should be followed.

# (5) Requirement to obtain evidence/ proof/ particulars of claims from the employee by the employer

Sub-section (2D) casts responsibility on the person responsible for paying any income chargeable under the head “Salaries” to obtain from the assessee, the evidence or proof or particulars of prescribed claims (including claim for set-off of loss) under the provisions of the Act in the prescribed form and manner, for the purposes of –

1. Estimating income of the assessee; or
2. Computing tax deductible under section 192(1).

In case an employee has intimated his employer of his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), Rule 26C requires furnishing of evidence of the following claims by him to the person responsible for making payment under section 192(1) in Form No.12BB for the purpose of estimating his income or computing the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

|S. No.|Nature of Claim|Evidence or particulars|
|---|---|---|
|1.|House Rent Allowance|Name, address and PAN of the landlord(s) where the aggregate rent paid during the previous year exceeds ` 1 lakh.|
|2.|Leave Travel Concession or Assistance|Evidence of expenditure|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.10 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3. Deduction of interest under the head “Income from house property”

# 4. Deduction under Chapter VI-A

# 3.2 Interest on securities [Section 193]

1. Person responsible for deduction of tax at source
This section casts responsibility on every person responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of interest on securities.
2. Meaning of interest on securities [Section 2(28B)]
Interest on securities means -

1. interest on any security of the Central Government or a State Government
2. interest on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on behalf of a local authority or a company or a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act.
3. Rate of TDS
Such person is vested with the responsibility to deduct income-tax at the rates in force from the amount of interest payable. The rate at which tax is deductible under section 193 is 10%, both in the case of domestic companies and non-corporate resident assessees.
4. Time of tax deduction at source
Tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier. Where any income by way of interest on securities is credited to any account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such interest is credited may be called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense account” or by any other name.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.11

# (5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 193

No tax deduction is to be made from any interest payable:

1. on National Development Bonds;
2. on 7-year National Savings Certificates (IV Issue);
3. on debentures issued by any institution or authority or any public sector company or any co-operative society (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank), as notified by the Central Government;

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 27 & 28/2018, dated 18-06-2018, notified-

“Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” issued by Power Finance Corporation Limited {PFCL} and
“Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” issued by Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited {IRFCL}

Thus, no tax is required to be deducted at source on interest payable on “Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” and “Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond”.

on any security of the Central Government or a State Government

Note – It may be noted that tax has to be deducted at source in respect of interest payable on 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003, or 7.75% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2018, only if such interest payable exceeds ` 10,000 during the financial year.

With effect from 1.10.2024, tax is required to be deducted in respect of interest payable on Floating Rate Savings Bonds, 2020 (Taxable) or any other notified security of the Central Government or State Government if such interest payable exceeds ` 10,000 during the financial year.

on any debentures (whether listed or not listed on a recognized stock exchange) issued by the company in which the public are substantially interested to a resident individual or HUF. However,
# 7.12 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) the interest should be paid by the company by an account payee cheque;

(b) the amount of such interest or the aggregate thereof paid or likely to be paid during the financial year by the company to such resident individual or HUF should not exceed ` 5,000.

(vi) on securities to LIC, GIC, subsidiaries of GIC or any other insurer, provided –

(a) the securities are owned by them or

(b) they have full beneficial interest in such securities.

# 3.3 Interest other than interest on securities [Section 194A]

This section deals with the scheme of deduction of tax at source from interest other than interest on securities. The main provisions are the following:

# (1) Applicability of TDS under section 194A

This section applies only to interest, other than “interest on securities”, credited or paid by assessees other than individuals or Hindu undivided family. However, an individual or Hindu undivided family whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the immediately preceding financial year is liable to deduct tax at source under this section.

# (2) Time of tax deduction at source

The deduction of tax must be made at the time of crediting such interest to the account of the payee or at the time of its payment in cash or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

Where any such interest is credited to any account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such interest is credited may be called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense account” or by any other name.

The CBDT has, vide Circular No.3/2010 dated 2.3.2010, given a clarification regarding deduction of tax at source on payment of interest on time.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Deposits under section 194A by banks following Core-branch Banking Solutions (CBS) software. It has been clarified that Explanation to section 194A is not meant to apply in cases of banks where credit is made to provisioning account on daily/monthly basis for the purpose of macro monitoring only by the use of CBS software. It has been further clarified that since no constructive credit to the depositor’s/payee’s account takes place while calculating interest on time deposits on daily or monthly basis in the CBS software used by banks, tax need not be deducted at source on such provisioning of interest by banks for the purposes of macro monitoring only. In such cases, tax shall be deducted at source on accrual of interest at the end of financial year or at periodic intervals as per practice of the bank or as per the depositor's/payee's requirement or on maturity or on encashment of time deposits, whichever event takes place earlier, whenever the aggregate of amounts of interest income credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year by the banks exceeds the limits specified in section 194A.

Note - The time for making the payment of tax deducted at source would reckon from the date of credit of interest made constructively to the account of the payee.

# (3) Rate of TDS

The rate at which the deduction is to be made is given in Part II of the First Schedule to the Annual Finance Act. The rate at which tax is to be deducted is 10% both in the case of non-corporate resident assessees and domestic companies.

# (4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194A

No deduction of tax shall be made in the following cases:

- (a) If the aggregate amount of interest paid or credited during the financial year does not exceed ` 5,000.
- This limit is ` 40,000 where the payer is a –
# 7.14 INCOME TAX LAW

“2019” and “Mahila Samman Savings Certificate, 2023” have been notified by the Central Government for this purpose.

In respect of (i), (ii) and (iii) above, the limit is ` 50,000, in case of payee, being a senior citizen.

The limit will be calculated with respect to income credited or paid by a branch of a banking company or a co-operative society or a public company in case of:

- (i) time deposits with a banking company
- (ii) time deposits with a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking; and
- (iii) deposits with housing finance companies, provided:

- - they are public companies formed and registered in India
- - their main object is to carry on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.

The threshold limit will be reckoned with reference to the total interest credited or paid by the banking company or the co-operative society or the public company, as the case may be, (and not with reference to each branch), where such banking company or co-operative society or public company has adopted core banking solutions.

Section 206A requires every banking company or co-operative society or public company referred to in above to prepare such statement, for such period as may be prescribed:

- - if they are responsible for paying to a resident,
- - the payment should be of any income not exceeding ` 40,000, where the payer is a banking company or a co-operative society, and ` 5,000 in any other case and
- - such income should be by way of interest (other than interest on securities).

The statement should be in the prescribed form and should be delivered to the DGIT (Systems) or person authorized by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(b) Interest paid or credited by a firm to any of its partners;

(c) Interest paid or credited in respect of deposits under any scheme framed by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf;

(d) Interest income credited or paid in respect of deposits (other than time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) with a bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies;

(e) Income paid or credited by a co-operative society (other than a co-operative bank) to a member thereof or to such income credited or paid by a co-operative society to any other co-operative society;

(f) Interest income credited or paid in respect of -

- (i) deposits with primary agricultural credit society or a primary credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank;
- (ii) deposit (other than time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) with a co-operative society [other than cooperative society or bank referred to in (i)] engaged in carrying on the business of banking.

From a combined reading of (e) and (f), it can be inferred that a co-operative bank other than mentioned in (i) above is required to deduct tax at source on payment of interest on time deposit to its members. However, it is not required to deduct tax from the payment of interest on time deposit, to a depositor, being a co-operative society.

However, a cooperative society referred to in (e) or (f) is liable to deduct tax if –

- (i) the total sales, gross receipts or turnover of the co-operative society exceeds ` 50 crores during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which interest is credited or paid; and
- (ii) the amount of interest or the aggregate amount of interest credited or paid, or is likely to be credited or paid, during the financial year is more than ` 50,000 in case of payee being a senior citizen and ` 40,000, in any other case.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.16 INCOME TAX LAW

Thus, such co-operative society is required to deduct tax under section 194A on interest credited or paid by it –

- (a) to its member or to any other co-operative society; or
- (b) in respect of deposits with a primary agricultural credit society or a primary credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank or
- (c) in respect of deposits with a co-operative bank other than a co-operative society or bank engaged in carrying on the business of banking

(g) Interest income credited or paid by the Central Government under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

(h) Interest paid or credited to the following entities:

- (i) banking companies, or co-operative societies engaged in the business of banking, including co-operative land mortgage banks;
- (ii) financial corporations established by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act.
- (iii) the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
- (iv) companies and co-operative societies carrying on the business of insurance.
- (v) the Unit Trust of India; and
- (vi) notified institution, association, body or class of institutions, associations or bodies (National Skill Development Fund and Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO), New Delhi have been notified by the Central Government for this purpose).

(i) income credited by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal;

(j) income paid by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal where the amount of such income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income paid during the financial year does not exceed ` 50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(k) income paid or payable by an infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or public sector company or scheduled bank in relation to a zero coupon bond issued on or after 1.6.2005.

# Notes

(1) The expression “time deposits” [for the purpose of (4)(a), (d) and (f) above] means the deposits, including recurring deposits, repayable on the expiry of fixed periods.

(2) Senior citizen means an individual resident in India who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.

# (5) Power to the Central Government to issue notification

The Central Government is empowered to issue notification for non-deduction of tax at source or deduction of tax at a lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons, specified in that notification.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Examine the TDS implications under section 194A in the cases mentioned hereunder–

1. On 1.10.2024, Mr. Harish made a six-month fixed deposit of ` 10 lakh @ 9% p.a. with ABC Co-operative Bank. The fixed deposit matures on 31.3.2025.
2. On 1.6.2024, Mr. Ganesh made three nine months fixed deposits of ` 3 lakh each, carrying interest @ 9% p.a. with Dwarka Branch, Janakpuri Branch and Rohini Branch of XYZ Bank, a bank which has adopted CBS. The fixed deposits mature on 28.2.2025.
3. On 1.10.2024, Mr. Rajesh started a six months recurring deposit of ` 2,00,000 per month @ 8% p.a. with PQR Bank. The recurring deposit matures on 31.3.2025.

# SOLUTION

1. ABC Co-operative Bank has to deduct tax at source @ 10% on the interest of ` 45,000 (9% × ` 10 lakh × ½) under section 194A. The tax deductible at source under section 194A from such interest is, therefore, ` 4,500.
2. XYZ Bank has to deduct tax at source @ 10% u/s 194A, since the aggregate interest on fixed deposit with the three branches of the bank is ` 60,750.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.18 INCOME TAX LAW

[3,00,000 × 3 × 9% × 9/12], which exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000. Since XYZ Bank has adopted CBS, the aggregate interest credited/paid by all branches has to be considered. Since the aggregate interest of ` 60,750 exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000, tax has to be deducted @10% u/s 194A.

(iii) No tax has to be deducted under section 194A by PQR Bank on the interest of ` 28,000 falling due on recurring deposit on 31.3.2025 to Mr. Rajesh, since such interest does not exceed the threshold limit of ` 40,000.

# 3.4 Winnings from online games [Section 194BA]

# (1) Applicability of TDS under section 194BA

Any person responsible for paying to any person any income by way of winnings from online games during the financial year is required to deduct tax @30% on the net winnings in a person’s user account as computed in prescribed manner, at the end of the F.Y.

# (2) TDS on withdrawal during the financial year

In case there is withdrawal from user account during the F.Y., tax would be deducted at the time of such withdrawal on net winnings comprised in such withdrawal. In addition, tax would also be deducted on the remaining amount of net winnings in the user account as computed in prescribed manner at the end of the F.Y.

# (3) Net winnings wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind

Where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings, the person responsible for paying shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in respect of the net winnings.

# (4) Meaning of certain terms

|S.No.|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Online gaming intermediary|An intermediary that offers one or more online games.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# (ii) User

Any person who accesses or avails any computer resource of an online gaming intermediary.

# (iii) User account

Account of a user registered with an online gaming intermediary.

# (5) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines

In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines, with the approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person liable to collect tax.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide circular No. 5/2023 dated 22.5.2023, issued the following guidelines:

# Question 1:

There are a large number of gamers who play with very insignificant amount and withdraw also very small amount. Deducting tax at source under section 194BA for each insignificant withdrawal would increase compliance for tax deductor. Can there be relaxation to ease compliance?

# Answer:

Tax may not be deducted on withdrawal on satisfaction of all of the following conditions, namely:-

1. net winnings comprised in the amount withdrawn does not exceed ` 100 in a month;
2. tax not deducted on account of this concession is deducted at a time when the net winnings comprised in withdrawal exceeds ` 100 in the same month or subsequent month or if there is no such withdrawal, at the end of the financial year; and
3. the deductor undertakes responsibility of paying the difference if the balance in the user account at the time of tax deduction under section 194BA is not sufficient to discharge the tax deduction liability.

# Question 2:

When the net winnings is in kind how will tax deduction under section 194BA operate?

# Answer:

At the outset, it may be clarified that where money in user account is used to buy an item in kind and given to user then it is net winnings in cash.
# 7.20 INCOME TAX LAW

only and the deductor is required to deduct tax at source under section 194BA accordingly.

However, there could be a situation where the winning of the game is a prize in kind. In that situation provision of section 194BA(2) will operate. According to this where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash, and partly in kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings. In these situations, the person responsible for paying, shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in respect of the net winnings. In the above situation, the deductor will release the net winnings in kind after the deductee provides proof of payment of such tax (e.g., Challan details etc.). In the alternative, as an option to remove difficulty if any, the deductor may deduct the tax under section 194BA and pay to the Government.

# Question 3: How will the valuation of winnings in kind required to be carried out?

Answer: The valuation would be based on fair market value of the winnings in kind except in following cases:

- (i) The online game intermediary has purchased the winnings before providing it to the user. In that case the purchase price shall be the value for winnings.
- (ii) The online game intermediary manufactures such items given as winnings. In that case, the price that it charges to its customers for such items shall be the value for such winnings.

It is further clarified that GST will not be included for the purposes of valuation of winnings for TDS under section 194BA.

# 3.5 Payments to contractors and sub-contractors [Section 194C]

# (1) Applicability of TDS under section 194C

Section 194C provides for deduction of tax at source from the payment made to resident contractors and sub-contractors. Tax has to be deducted at source under section 194C by any person responsible for paying any sum to a resident contractor for carrying out any
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of a contract between the contractor and the –

1. the Central Government or any State Government; or
2. any local authority; or
3. any statutory corporation; or
4. any company; or
5. any co-operative society; or
6. any statutory authority dealing with housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages or for both; or
7. any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; or
8. any trust; or
9. any university established or incorporated by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a university under the UGC Act, 1956; or
10. any firm; or
11. any Government of a foreign State or foreign enterprise or any association or body established outside India; or
12. any person, being an individual, HUF, AOP or BOI, who has total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeding ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which such sum is credited or paid to the account of the contractor.

# Time of deduction

Tax has to be deducted at the time of payment of such sum or at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the contractor, whichever is earlier. Where any such sum is credited to any account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such sum is credited may be called “Suspense account” or by any other name.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.22 INCOME TAX LAW

However, no tax has to be deducted at source in respect of payments made by individuals/HUF to a contractor exclusively for personal purposes.

# (3) Rate of TDS

The rate of TDS under section 194C on payments to contractors would be 1%, where the payee is an individual or HUF and 2% in respect of other payees. The same rates of TDS would apply for both contractors and sub-contractors.

The applicable rates of TDS under section 194C are as follows –

|Payee|TDS rate|
|---|---|
|Individual HUF contractor/sub-contractor|1%|
|Other than individual/HUF contractor/ sub-contractor|2%|
|Contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished)|Nil|
|Sub-contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished)|Nil|

# (4) Threshold limit for deduction of tax at source under section 194C

No deduction will be required to be made if the consideration for the contract does not exceed ` 30,000. However, to prevent the practice of composite contracts being split up into contracts valued at less than ` 30,000 to avoid tax deduction, it has been provided that tax will be required to be deducted at source where the amount credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid to a contractor or sub-contractor exceeds ` 30,000 in a single payment or ` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during a financial year.

Therefore, even if a single payment to a contractor does not exceed ` 30,000, TDS provisions under section 194C would be attracted where the aggregate of the amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid to the contractor during the financial year exceeds ` 1,00,000.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

ABC Ltd. makes the following payments to Mr. X, a contractor, for contract work during the P.Y.2024-25–

` 20,000 on 1.5.2024
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

₹ 25,000 on 1.8.2024

₹ 28,000 on 1.12.2024

On 1.3.2025, a payment of ₹ 30,000 is due to Mr. X on account of a contract work.

Discuss whether ABC Ltd. is liable to deduct tax at source under section 194C from payments made to Mr. X.

# SOLUTION

In this case, the individual contract payments made to Mr. X does not exceed ₹ 30,000. However, since the aggregate amount paid to Mr. X during the P.Y. 2024-25 exceeds ₹ 1,00,000 (on account of the last payment of ₹ 30,000, due on 1.3.2025, taking the total from ₹ 73,000 to ₹ 1,03,000), the TDS provisions under section 194C would get attracted. Tax has to be deducted @1% on the entire amount of ₹ 1,03,000 from the last payment of ₹ 30,000 and the balance of ₹ 28,970 (i.e., ₹ 30,000 – ₹ 1,030) has to be paid to Mr. X.

# (5) Definition of work

Work includes –

- (a) advertising;
- (b) broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for such broadcasting or telecasting;
- (c) carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than by railways;
- (d) catering;
- (e) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate, being a person related to the customer in such manner as defined u/s 40A(2)(b), (i.e., the customer would be in the place of assessee; and the associate would be the related person(s) mentioned in that section).

However, “work” shall not include manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using raw material purchased from a person, other than such customer or associate of such customer, as such a contract is a contract for ‘sale’. However, this will
# 7.24 INCOME TAX LAW

not be applicable to a contract which does not entail manufacture or supply of an article or thing (e.g. a construction contract).

It may be noted that the term “work” would include manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate. In such a case, tax shall be deducted on the invoice value excluding the value of material purchased from such customer or its associate, if such value is mentioned separately in the invoice. Where the material component has not been separately mentioned in the invoice, tax shall be deducted on the whole of the invoice value.

Further, w.e.f. 1.10.2024, it is clarified that “work” shall also not include any sum referred to in section 194J(1).

# (6) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194C

No deduction is required to be made from the sum credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, if he furnishes his PAN to the deductor.

In order to convey the true intent of law, it has been clarified that this relaxation from the requirement to deduct tax at source shall only be applicable to the payment in the nature of transport charges (whether paid by a person engaged in the business of transport or otherwise) made to a contractor, who fulfills the following three conditions cumulatively -

|is engaged in the|business of plying,|
|---|---|
|owns ten or less| |
|hiring or leasing goods| |
|carriages|has furnished a|
|at any time|declaration to this|
|during the|effect along with his|
|previous year|PAN|

# Exemption u/s 194C(6)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

7.25

# Meaning of Goods carriage:

Goods carriage means -

1. any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage of goods; or
2. any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted, when used for the carriage of goods.

The term “motor vehicle” does not include vehicles having less than four wheels and with engine capacity not exceeding 25cc as well as vehicles running on rails or vehicles adapted for use in a factory or in enclosed premises.

# Important points

1. The deduction of income-tax will be made from sums paid for carrying out any work or for supplying labour for carrying out any work. In other words, the section will apply only in relation to ‘works contracts’ and ‘labour contracts’ and will not cover contracts for sale of goods.
2. Contracts for rendering professional services by lawyers, physicians, surgeons, engineers, accountants, architects, consultants etc., cannot be regarded as contracts for carrying out any “work” and, accordingly, no deduction of income-tax is to be made from payments relating to such contracts under this section. Separate provisions for fees for professional services have been made under section 194J.
3. The deduction of income-tax must be made at the time of credit of the sum to the account of the contractor, or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

# ILLUSTRATION 4

Certain concessions are granted to transport operators in the context of cash payments u/s 40A(3) and deduction of tax at source u/s 194-C. Elucidate.

# SOLUTION

Section 40A(3) provides for disallowance of expenditure incurred in respect of which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day exceeds ₹ 10,000, and such payment or payments are made otherwise than by account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through bank account or through other prescribed electronic modes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.26 INCOME TAX LAW

However, in case of payment made to transport operators for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, the disallowance will be attracted only if the payment made to a person in a day exceeds ` 35,000. Therefore, payment or aggregate of payments up to ` 35,000 in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic system through bank account or through other prescribed electronic modes, without attracting disallowance u/s 40A(3).

Under section 194C, tax had to be deducted in respect of payments made to contractors at the rate of 1%, in case the payment is made to individual or Hindu Undivided Family or at the rate of 2%, in any other case.

However, no deduction is required to be made from any sum credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, if the following conditions are fulfilled:

1. He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the previous year.
2. He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages;
3. He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.

# 3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]

1. Applicability and Rate of TDS
Any person other than an individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying any income by way of commission (other than insurance commission) or brokerage to a resident shall deduct income tax @5% till 30.09.2024. With effect from 01.10.2024, tax has to be deducted @2%.

However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding financial year in which such commission or brokerage is credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.
2. Time of deduction
The deduction shall be made at the time such income is credited to the account of the payee or at the time of payment in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Even where income is credited to some other account, whether called “Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit to the account of the payee for the purposes of this section.

# (3) Threshold limit

No deduction is required if the amount of such income or the aggregate of such amount does not exceed ` 15,000 during the financial year.

# (4) Meaning of “Commission or brokerage”

“Commission or brokerage” includes any payment received or receivable, directly or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person:

- for services rendered, or
- for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods, or
- in relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or thing, other than securities.

# (5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194H

(i) This section is not applicable to professional services. “Professional Services” means services rendered by a person in the course of carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or such other profession as notified by the CBDT for the purpose of compulsory maintenance of books of account under section 44AA.

(ii) Further, there would be no requirement to deduct tax at source on a commission or brokerage payments by BSNL or MTNL to their public call office (PCO) franchisees.

# (6) Applicability of TDS provisions on payments by television channels and publishing houses to advertisement companies for procuring or canvassing for advertisements [Circular No. 05/2016, dated 29-2-2016]

There are two types of payments involved in the advertising business:

- Payment by client to the advertising agency, and
- Payment by advertising agency to the television channel/newspaper company.
# 7.28 INCOME TAX LAW

The applicability of TDS on these payments has already been dealt with in Circular No. 715 dated 8-8-1995, where it has been clarified in Question Nos. 1 & 2 that while TDS under section 194C (as work contract) will be applicable on the first type of payment, there will be no TDS under section 194C on the second type of payment e.g. payment by advertising agency to the media company.

However, another issue has been raised in various cases as to whether the fees/charges taken or retained by advertising companies from media companies for canvasing/booking advertisements (typically 15% of the billing) is ‘commission’ or ‘discount’ for attracting the provisions of section 194H.

The CBDT has clarified that no TDS is attracted on payments made by television channels/newspaper companies to the advertising agency for booking or procuring of or canvassing for advertisements. It is also further clarified that ‘commission’ referred to in Question No.27 of the CBDT’s Circular No. 715 dated 8-8-1995 does not refer to payments by media companies to advertising companies for booking of advertisements but to payments for engagement of models, artists, photographers, sportspersons, etc. and, therefore, is not relevant to the issue of TDS referred to in this Circular.

# ILLUSTRATION 5

Moon TV, a television channel, made payment of ` 50 lakhs to a production house for production of programme for telecasting as per the specifications given by the channel. The copyright of the programme is also transferred to Moon TV. Would such payment be liable for tax deduction at source under section 194C? Discuss. Also, examine whether the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C would be attracted if the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of telecasting rights of the content already produced by the production house.

# SOLUTION

In this case, since the programme is produced by the production house as per the specifications given by Moon TV, a television channel, and the copyright is also transferred to the television channel, the same falls within the scope of definition of the term ‘work’ under section 194C. Therefore, the payment of ` 50 lakhs made by Moon TV to the production house would be subject to tax deduction at source under section 194C.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

If, however, the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of telecasting rights of the content already produced by the production house, there is no contract for “carrying out any work”, as required in section 194C(1). Therefore, such payment would not be liable for tax deduction at source under section 194C.

# 3.7 Rent [Section 194-I]

# (1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

Any person other than individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of rent, is liable to deduct tax at source. However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.

# (2) Rate of TDS

Tax has to be deducted at the rate of:

- (i) 2% in respect of rent for plant, machinery or equipment;
- (ii) 10% in respect of other rental payments (i.e., rent for use of any land or building, including factory building, or land appurtenant to a building, including factory building, or furniture or fittings).

# (3) Time of deduction

This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier. Where any such income is credited to any account, whether called “Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section will apply accordingly.

# (4) Threshold limit

No deduction shall be made where the amount of such income or the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be
# 7.30 INCOME TAX LAW

credited or paid during the financial year to the account of the payee does not exceed ` 2,40,000.

# (5) Meaning of Rent

“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or together) any –

- (a) land; or
- (b) building (including factory building); or
- (c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
- (d) machinery; or
- (e) plant; or
- (f) equipment; or
- (g) furniture; or
- (h) fittings,

whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.

# (6) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to payments made by the customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners

CBDT Circular No.1/2008 dated 10.1.2008 provides clarification regarding applicability of provisions of section 194-I to payments made by the customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners.

The main function of the cold storage is to preserve perishable goods by means of a mechanical process, and storage of such goods is only incidental in nature. The customer is also not given any right to use any demarcated space/place or the machinery of the cold store and thus does not become a tenant. Therefore, the provisions of 194-I are not applicable to the cooling charges paid by the customers of the cold storage.

However, since the arrangement between the customers and cold storage owners are basically contractual in nature, the provision of section 194-C will be applicable to the amounts paid as cooling charges by the customers of the cold storage.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(7) No requirement to deduct tax at source under section 194-I on remittance of Passenger Service Fees (PSF) by an Airline to an Airport Operator [Circular No. 21/2017, dated 12.06.2017]

The primary requirement of any payment to qualify as rent is that the payment must be for the use of land and building and mere incidental/minor/insignificant use of the same while providing other facilities and service would not make it a payment for use of land and buildings so as to attract section 194-I.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that the provisions of section 194-I shall not be applicable on payment of PSF by an airline to Airport Operator.

(8) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to service tax component of rental income

CBDT Circular No.4/2008 dated 28.4.2008 provides clarification on deduction of tax at source (TDS) on service tax component of rental income under section 194-I.

As per the provisions of 194-I, tax is deductible at source on income by way of rent paid to any resident. Further, rent has been defined in 194-I to mean any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or together) any,

- (a) land; or
- (b) building (including factory building); or
- (c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
- (d) machinery; or
- (e) plant; or
- (f) equipment; or
- (g) furniture; or
- (h) fittings,

whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.32 INCOME TAX LAW

Service tax paid by the tenant doesn’t partake the nature of income of the landlord. The landlord only acts as a collecting agency for Government for collection of service tax. Therefore, tax deduction at source under section 194-I would be required to be made on the amount of rent paid/payable without including the service tax.

Note - It is possible to take a view that the clarification given in Circular No.4/2008 would apply in the GST regime also.

# Clarification regarding TDS on Goods and Services Tax (GST) component comprised in payments made to residents [Circular No. 23/2017 dated 19.07.2017]

The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that wherever in terms of the agreement or contract between the payer and the payee, the component of ‘GST on services’ comprised in the amount payable to a resident is indicated separately, tax shall be deducted at source on the amount paid or payable without including such ‘GST on services’ component.

GST shall include Integrated Goods and Services Tax, Central Goods and Services Tax, State Goods and Services Tax and Union Territory Goods and Services Tax.

Further, for the purposes of this Circular, any reference to “service tax” in an existing agreement or contract which was entered into prior to 01.07.2017 shall be treated as “GST on services” with respect to the period from 01.07.2017 onward till the expiry of such agreement or contract.

# Clarification on applicability of TDS provisions of section 194-I on lumpsum lease premium paid for acquisition of long term lease [Circular No.35/2016, dated 13-10-2016]

The issue of whether or not TDS under section 194-I is applicable on ‘lump sum lease premium’ or ‘one-time upfront lease charges” paid by an assessee for acquiring long-term leasehold rights for land or any other property has been examined by the CBDT.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that lump sum lease premium or one-time upfront lease charges, which are not adjustable against periodic rent, paid or payable for acquisition of long-term leasehold rights over land or any other property are not payments in the nature of income.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Rent within the meaning of section 194-I. Therefore, such payments are not liable for TDS under section 194-I.

# ILLUSTRATION 6

XYZ Ltd. pays ` 50,000 per month as rent to Mr. Kishore for a building in which one of its branches is situated. Discuss whether TDS provisions under section 194-I are attracted.

# SOLUTION

Section 194-I, which governs the deduction of tax at source on payment of rent, exceeding ` 2,40,000 p.a., is applicable to all taxable entities except individuals and HUFs, whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him does not exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.

Since the rent paid by XYZ Ltd. to Mr. Kishore exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions of section 194-I for deduction of tax at source are attracted.

The rate applicable for deduction at source under section 194-I on rent paid is 10%, assuming that Mr. Kishore had furnished his PAN to XYZ Ltd.

Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source = ` 6,00,000 x 10% = ` 60,000

# 3.8 Payment of rent by certain individuals or Hindu undivided family [Section 194-IB]

# (1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

Section 194-IB requires any person, being individual or HUF, other than those individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession in the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of rent, to deduct income tax @5% till 30.09.2024. With effect from 01.10.2024, tax has to be deducted @2%.
# 7.34 INCOME TAX LAW

1. # Threshold limit

Under this section, tax has to be deducted at source only if the amount of such rent exceeds ` 50,000 for a month or part of a month during the previous year.
2. # Time of deduction

This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such rent, for the last month of the previous year or the last month of tenancy, if the property is vacated during the year, as the case may be, to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
3. # No requirement to obtain TAN

The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194-IB.
4. # Meaning of “Rent”

“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any land or building or both.
5. # Deduction not to exceed rent for last month

Where the tax is required to be deducted as per the provisions of section 206AA, such deduction shall not exceed the amount of rent payable for the last month of the previous year or the last month of the tenancy, as the case may be [Section 206AA providing for deduction of tax at source at a higher rate is discussed at length later on in this chapter]

# ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. X, a salaried individual, pays rent of ` 55,000 per month to Mr. Y from June, 2024. Is he required to deduct tax at source? If so, when is he required to deduct tax? Also, compute the amount of tax to be deducted at source.

Would your answer change if Mr. X vacated the premises on 31st December, 2024? Also, what would be your answer if Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Since Mr. X pays rent exceeding ` 50,000 per month in the F.Y. 2024-25, he is liable to deduct tax at source @5% till 30.09.2024 and thereafter @2%. The tax is to be deducted in the last month of the P.Y. 2024-25 i.e., March 2025 or in the last month of tenancy, if the property is vacated during the year. Since property is not vacated during the year, ` 11,000 [(` 55,000 x 2% x 10)] has to be deducted from rent payable for March, 2025.

If Mr. X vacated the premises in December, 2024, then tax of ` 7,700 [(` 55,000 x 2% x 7)] has to be deducted from rent payable for December, 2024.

In case Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X, tax would be deductible @20%, instead of 2%.

In case 1 above, this would amount to ` 1,10,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 10], but the same has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for March, 2025.

In case 2 above, this would amount to ` 77,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 7], but the same has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for December, 2024.

# 3.9 Fees for professional or technical services [Section 194J]

# (1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

Every person other than an individual or a HUF, who is responsible for paying to a resident any sum by way of –

- (i) fees for professional services; or
- (ii) fees for technical services; or
- (iii) any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called, other than those on which tax is deductible under section 192, to a director of a company; or
- (iv) royalty, or
- (v) non-compete fees referred to in section 28(va)

shall deduct tax at source at the rate of –

- (a) 2% in case of fees for technical services (not being professional services) or royalty in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic films;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.36 INCOME TAX LAW

(b) 10% in other cases. However, in case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of call centre, the tax shall be deducted at source @2%

# Time of deduction

The deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier. Where such sum is credited to any account, whether called suspense account or by any other name, in the books of accounts of the person liable to pay such sum, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such sum to the account of the payee and tax has to be deducted accordingly.

# Threshold limit

No tax deduction is required if the amount of fees or the aggregate of the amounts of fees credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during a financial year does not exceed ` 30,000 in the case of fees for professional services, ` 30,000 in the case of fees for technical services, ` 30,000 in the case of royalty and ` 30,000 in the case of non-compete fees. The limit of ` 30,000 under section 194J is applicable separately for fees for professional services, fees for technical services, royalty and non-compete fees referred to in section 28(va). It implies that if the payment to a person towards each of the above is less than ` 30,000, no tax is required to be deducted at source, even though the aggregate payment or credit exceeds ` 30,000. However, there is no such exemption limit for deduction of tax on any remuneration or fees or commission payable to director of a company.

# Summary of rates and threshold limit under section 194J for deduction of tax at source

|Nature of payment|TDS rate|Separate Limit|
|---|---|---|
|Fees for technical services (not being professional services)|2%|` 30,000|
|Fees for professional services|10%|` 30,000|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Royalty in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic films|2%|₹ 30,000|
|---|---|---|
|Other royalty|10%| |
|Any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called, other than those on which tax is deductible under section 192, to a director of a company|10%|Nil|
|Non-compete fees|10%|₹ 30,000|

In case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of call centre, the tax shall be deducted at source @2%

# ILLUSTRATION 8

XYZ Ltd. makes a payment of ₹ 28,000 to Mr. Ganesh on 2.8.2024 towards fees for professional services and another payment of ₹ 25,000 to him on the same date towards fees for technical services. Discuss whether TDS provisions under section 194J are attracted.

# SOLUTION

TDS provisions under section 194J would not get attracted, since the limit of ₹ 30,000 is applicable for fees for professional services and fees for technical services, separately. It is assumed that there is no other payment to Mr. Ganesh towards fees for professional services and fees for technical services during the P.Y.2024-25.

# (4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194J

(i) An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at source. However, an individual or HUF, whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from business or profession carried by him exceeds ₹ 1 crore in case of business or ₹ 50 lakhs in case of profession in the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the fees for professional services or fees for technical services is credited or paid is required to deduct tax on such fees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.38 INCOME TAX LAW

Since this provision requires such individuals/HUFs to deduct tax at source only in respect of fees for professional services or fees for technical services, it can be inferred that individuals and HUFs are not required to deduct tax at source under section 194J on royalty and non-compete fees.

(ii) Further, an individual or Hindu Undivided Family, shall not be liable to deduct income-tax on the sum payable by way of fees for professional services, in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively for personal purposes.

# (5) Meaning of “Professional services”

“Professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course of carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or advertising or such other profession as is notified by the CBDT for the purposes of section 44AA or of this section.

Other professions notified for the purposes of section 44AA are as follows:

- (a) Profession of “authorised representatives”;
- (b) Profession of “film artist”;
- (c) Profession of “company secretary”;
- (d) Profession of “information technology”.

The CBDT has notified the services rendered by following persons in relation to the sports activities as Professional Services for the purpose of the section 194J:

- (a) Sports Persons,
- (b) Umpires and Referees,
- (c) Coaches and Trainers,
- (d) Team Physicians and Physiotherapists,
- (e) Event Managers,
- (f) Commentators,
- (g) Anchors and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(h) Sports Columnists.

Accordingly, the requirement of TDS as per section 194J would apply to all the aforesaid professions. The term “profession”, as such, is of a very wide import. However, the term has been defined in this section exhaustively. For the purposes of TDS, therefore, all other professions would be outside the scope of section 194J. For example, this section will not apply to professions of teaching, sculpture, painting etc. unless they are notified.

# (6) Meaning of “Fees for technical services”

The term ‘fees for technical services’ means any consideration (including any lump sum consideration) for rendering of any of the following services:

- (i) Managerial services;
- (ii) Technical services;
- (iii) Consultancy services;
- (iv) Provision of services of technical or other personnel.

It is expressly provided that the term ‘fees for technical services’ will not include following types of consideration:

- (i) Consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project, or
- (ii) Consideration which is chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’.

# (7) TPAs liable to deduct tax under section 194J on payment to hospitals on behalf of insurance companies

The CBDT has, through Circular No.8/2009 dated 24.11.2009, clarified that TPAs (Third Party Administrator’s) who are making payment on behalf of insurance companies to hospitals for settlement of medical/insurance claims etc. under various schemes including cashless schemes are liable to deduct tax at source under section 194J on all such payments to hospitals etc. This is because the services rendered by hospitals to various patients are primarily medical services and, therefore, the provisions of section 194J are applicable to payments made by TPAs to hospitals etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.40 INCOME TAX LAW

(8) Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)

As per section 9(1)(vi), any income payable by way of royalty in respect of any right, property or information is deemed to accrue or arise in India. The term “royalty” means consideration for transfer of all or any right in respect of certain rights, property or information.

As per Explanation 4 to section 9(1)(vi), the consideration for use or right to use of computer software would be royalty. This Explanation clarifies that transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or information includes and has always included transfer of all or any right for use or right to use a computer software (including granting of a licence) irrespective of the medium through which such right is transferred.

Consequently, the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194J would be attracted in respect of consideration for use or right to use computer software since the same falls within the definition of royalty as per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

The Central Government has, vide Notification No.21/2012 dated 13.6.2012, effective from 1ˢᵗ July, 2012, exempted certain software payments from the applicability of tax deduction under section 194J. Accordingly, where payment is made by the transferee for acquisition of software from a resident-transferor, the provisions of section 194J would not be attracted if-

1. the software is acquired in a subsequent transfer without any modification by the transferor;
2. tax has been deducted under section 194J on payment for any previous transfer of such software; and
3. the transferee obtains a declaration from the transferor that tax has been so deducted along with the PAN of the transferor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 3.10 Payment made by an individual or a HUF for contract work or by way of commission or brokerage or fees for professional services [Section 194M]

# (1) Applicability and rate of TDS

Section 194M provides for deduction of tax at source @5%* by an individual or a HUF responsible for paying any sum during the financial year to any resident –

- (i) for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of a contract; or
- (ii) by way of commission (not being insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or brokerage; or
- (iii) by way of fees for professional services.

It may be noted that only individuals and HUFs (other than those who are required to deduct income-tax as per the provisions of section 194C or 194H or 194J) are required to deduct tax in respect of the above sums payable during the financial year to a resident.

*Rate of tax has been reduced to 2% with effect from 01.10.2024.

# (2) Time of deduction

The tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such sum or at the time of payment of such sum, whichever is earlier.

# (3) Threshold limit

No tax is required to be deducted where such sum or, as the case may be, aggregate amount of such sums credited or paid to a resident during the financial year does not exceed ` 50,00,000.

# (4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194M

An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at source u/s 194M if –

- (i) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194C for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of a contract i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the immediately preceding financial year.
# 7.42 INCOME TAX LAW

amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of such individual or HUF.

(ii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194H on commission (not being insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or brokerage i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the immediately preceding financial year.

(iii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194J on fees for professional services i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of such individual or HUF.

# (5) No requirement to obtain TAN

The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194M.

Note - For the meaning of the terms “Work”, “Professional services” and “Commission or brokerage” refer sub-heading “3.5 Payments to contractors and sub-contractors [Section 194C]”, “3.9 Fees for professional or technical services [Section 194J]” and “3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]”, respectively.

# ILLUSTRATION 9

Examine whether TDS provisions would be attracted in the following cases, and if so, under which section. Also specify the rate of TDS applicable in each case. Assume that all payments are made to residents.

|Particulars of the payer|Nature of payment|Aggregate of payments made in the F.Y.2024-25|
|---|---|---|
|1. Mr. Ganesh, an individual carrying|Contract Payment for repair of residential house|` 5 lakhs|

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 1.

Mr. Vallish for business purposes

Payment of commission to ₹ 80,000 in November 2024

# 2.

Mr. Rajesh, a wholesale trader whose turnover was ₹ 95 lakhs in P.Y. 2023-24.

Payment for reconstruction of residential house (made ₹ 15 lakhs in Feb 2025 and ₹ 20 lakhs in March 2025).

# 3.

Mr. Satish, a salaried individual

Payment of brokerage for buying a residential house in March 2025 ₹ 51 lakhs

# 4.

Mr. Dheeraj, a pensioner

Contract payment made during October-November 2024 for reconstruction of residential house ₹ 48 lakhs

# SOLUTION

|Particulars of the payer|Nature of payments|Aggregate payment in the F.Y. 2024-25|Whether TDS provisions are attracted?|
|---|---|---|---|
|Mr. Ganesh, an individual carrying on retail business with turnover of ₹ 2.5 crores in the P.Y. 2023-24|Contract Payment for repair of residential house|₹ 5 lakhs|No; TDS under section 194C is not attracted since the payment is for personal purpose. TDS under section 194M is not attracted as aggregate of contract payment to the payee in the P.Y. 2024-25 does not exceed ₹ 50 lakh.|
| |Payment of commission to Mr. Vallish for business purposes|₹ 80,000|Yes, u/s 194H @2%, since the payment exceeds ₹ 15,000, and Mr. Ganesh’s turnover exceeds ₹ 1 crore in the P.Y. 2023-24.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.44 INCOME TAX LAW

|2.|Mr. Rajesh, a wholesale trader whose turnover was of ` 95 lakhs in P.Y. 2023-24|Contract Payment for|` 55 lakhs|Yes, u/s 194M @2%, since the aggregate of payments (i.e., ` 55 lakhs) exceed ` 50 lakhs.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | |Since, his turnover does not exceed 1 crore in the P.Y.2023-24, TDS provisions under section 194C are not attracted in respect of payments made in the P.Y. 2024-25.|
|3.|Mr. Satish, a salaried individual|Payment of brokerage for|` 51 lakhs|Yes, u/s 194M @2%, since the payment of ` 51 lakhs made in March 2025 exceeds the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.|
| | | | |Since Mr. Satish is a salaried individual, the provisions of section 194H are not applicable in this case.|
|4.|Mr. Dheeraj, a pensioner|Contract payment for|` 48 lakhs|TDS provisions under section 194C are not attracted since Mr. Dheeraj is a pensioner.|
| | | | |TDS provisions under section 194M are also not applicable in this case, since the payment of ` 48 lakhs does not exceed the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 3.11 TDS on cash withdrawal [Section 194N]

# (1) Applicability and rate of TDS

Section 194N provides that every person, being

- a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including any bank or banking institution referred under section 51 of that Act)
- a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking or
- a post office

who is responsible for paying any sum, being the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, in cash exceeding ` 1 crore during the previous year, to any person from one or more accounts maintained by such recipient-person with it, shall deduct tax at source @2% of such sum. However, if the recipient is a co-operative society, tax is required to be deducted on any sum exceeding ` 3 crore.

# (2) Time of deduction

This deduction is to be made at the time of payment of such sum.

# (3) Modification in rate of TDS and threshold limit of withdrawal for recipient who has not furnished return of income for last 3 years

If the recipient has not furnished the returns of income for all the three assessment years relevant to the three previous years, for which the time limit to file return of income under section 139(1) has expired, immediately preceding the previous year in which the payment of the sum is made, “the sum” shall mean the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, in cash > ` 20 lakhs during the previous year, and the tax shall be deducted at the rate of -

- 2% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, being paid in cash > ` 20 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore (` 3 crore in case the recipient is a co-operative society)
- 5% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, being paid in cash > ` 1 crore (` 3 crore in case the recipient is a co-operative society).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.46 INCOME TAX LAW

However, the Central Government is empowered to specify, with the consultation of RBI, by notification, the recipient in whose case this provision shall not apply or apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions specified in such notification.

# (4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194N

Liability to deduct tax at source under section 194N shall not be applicable to any payment made to –

- (i) the Government
- (ii) any banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking or a post-office
- (iii) any business correspondent of a banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance with the RBI guidelines
- (iv) any white label ATM operator of a banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance with the authorisation issued by the RBI under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007

The Central Government may specify, with the consultation of RBI, by notification, the recipient in whose case section 194N shall not apply or apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions specified in such notification.

# Example

The persons referred to in (i) to (vi) in Column (2) of the table below have always been filing their returns of income on or before the due date u/s 139(1). The persons mentioned in (vii) to (x) in Column (2) of the table below have not filed their returns of income for the last five years. Determine the liability of deduction of tax at source u/s 194N by the bank/co-operative bank referred to in column (3) of the table below in each of the following individual cases, assuming that this is the only withdrawal in the P.Y.2024-25 by the persons referred to in Column (2).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|(1)|(2)|(3)|(4)|(5)|(6)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Person making the withdrawal|Bank/Co-operative Bank from which money is withdrawn|Date of withdrawal|Amount of withdrawal (`)|TDS u/s 194N (`)| |
|Mr. Harishit|SBI|1.7.2024|1,10,00,000|` 10,00,000 x 2% = ` 20,000| |
|Mr. Pranav|SBI|1.8.2024|90,00,000|Nil (since withdrawals &lt; ` 1 crore)| |
|ABC Co-operative Society|SBI|1.9.2024|2,70,00,000|Nil (since withdrawals &lt; ` 3 crore)| |
|XYZ Co-operative Society|MNO Co-operative bank|1.9.2024|3,10,00,000|` 10,00,000 x 2% = ` 20,000| |
|Mr. Vaibhav|MNO Co-operative bank|1.9.2024|2,10,00,000|` 1,10,00,000 x 2% = ` 2,20,000| |
|A Ltd.|MNO Co-operative bank|1.10.2024|1,05,00,000|` 5,00,000 x 2% = ` 10,000| |
|M/s. DEF & Co., a firm|MNO Co-operative bank|1.2.2025|90,00,000|` 70,00,000 x 2% = ` 1,40,000| |
|Mr. Varun|BOI|1.2.2025|1,20,00,000|` 80,00,000 x 2% (+) ` 20,00,000 x 5% = ` 2,60,000| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.48 INCOME TAX LAW

|(ix)|Mr. Rakesh|BOI|1.2.2025|45,00,000|` 25,00,000 x 2% = ` 50,000|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(x)|PQR Co-operative Society|BOI|1.2.2025|3,30,00,000|` 2,80,00,000 x 2% (+) ` 30,00,000 x 5% = ` 7,10,000|

# 3.12 OTHER TDS PROVISIONS

The other TDS provisions are given below in tabular form -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|after|5|5|ill health, contraction|
|---|---|---|---|
|before|balance|business, cessation of|subsidiaries|

# Other relevant points

|Exemption from TDS|opt|servicecase|service|is|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Withdrawal|accumulated|employee|termination|or|
|transfer|GIC,|continuous|withdrawal|GIC|
|continuous|and|years|or|years|
|1.|2.|(a)|(b)|(a)|
|At the time|deduction|of payment|Time of|making any|
|payment|before|mode|B|by|
|withdrawal|Rate of|TDS|10%|taxable|
|(Employee)|Payee|Individual|Resident|sharehol|
|under|or authorised|a|Principal|of domestic|
|company|Officer|EPF|any|or|
|≥|tax at source|deduction of|Threshold|Limit for|
|aggregate|payment|Payment50,000|Amount|amount|
|in|F.Y.,|`|`|on >|

# Nature of payment

|s’|withdrawal|Premature|Employee|Provident|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|from|Fund|Section|192A|194|

# INCOME TAX LAW

7.50 or tax in respect of whole partly in kind but the person responsible for releasing the winnings, sufficient to meet the liability of deduction provided they in such shares are owned by the Government.

Other relevant points:

(a) Where the winnings are partly in cash and partly in kind, the insurer may notify the person responsible for paying them.

(b) At the time of making any distribution of dividend or payment of winnings, the deduction of tax at source shall be made.

Time of payment of dividend: Rate of TDS 30%

Any Person responsible for paying income by way of such winnings.

Threshold Limit for deduction: Amounts credited other than dividend shall be > ₹10,000.

Nature of payment: Winnings from lottery, puzzle or card game or other form or nature from betting of any sort under section 194B.

Dividend includes (a) any payment under section 2(22)(f).
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

off of losses.

of the net losses, has to be paid and losses are to be debited.

Other relevant points include tax on winnings from horse races.

Where winnings have been paid in respect of one horse race, the tax has to be credited to the winner.

That dual circumstances necessitate, ensure to punter, wherever.

(b) At the time of payment.

|Time of|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
| |30%|Any Person holding licence for horse racing|Book Maker or any person arranging wagering|

Threshold Limit for deduction of tax at source is an aggregate amount of ₹10,000.

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India F.Y. would be applicable.

Nature of online payment from horse race winnings.

Section 194BA and 194BB.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.52

# Other relevant points

he sum received under a Exemption from TDS insurance

# At the time of deduction of credit of

Time of payment, whichever is earlier.

# Rate of TDS

|payee|corporate|5%, if the payee is a resident company|
|---|---|---|
|non-resident|5%|Any|
|for any person|for the|paying any sum|
|responsible|remuneration|(including insurance)|
|Any|paying|or|
|of|or|≥ 1,00,000 in|

# Threshold Limit for

|aggregate Amount|aggregate Amount|
|---|---|
|sum not|Life Insurance|

# Nature of payment

Commission
Insurance
# Section

194D
194DA
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

called of for the is in such purposes immovable specified the be deemed to be credit to or the books of account of Other relevant points other the person liable to pay.

under section 10(10D) income account” of some shall fulfill whether, income of this section. other account consideration conditions to “Suspense crediting Meaning account, credited any transfer which Where such payee by the to the payee sum At the time deduction of of of of of credit of Time of whichever payment, account is earlier. income at credit At time such the the time such or to 30.09.2024. rate of tax Thereafter 1.10.2024, for transfer or stamp.

Rate of . TDS W.e.f. 2% . 1% of is 5% 2% or distributin purchasin transferor.

Payee Resident person lottery selling tickets Any g, g person, the of allocated whatever name of commission, person income by way r any (by responsible fo lottery tickets.

Payer way remuneration than sum bonus Any paying called) Any financial 15,000 lakh tax at source deduction of Considerati Threshold Limit for in a F.Y. 50 transfer.

year a > ≥ ( the u/s of Nature of Commission payment conditions sale immovable specified fulfilling 10(10D) lottery tickets on Section 194G IA - 194.
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.54

|property|immovable|consideration|
|---|---|---|
|club|that or|s to|
|car fee, which|with effect|of amount paid or payable|
|charges|maintenance fee, advance|include all charges of the|
|Consideration for transfer|any immovable property,|where there is more than|
|Other relevant points|electricity transfer|respect shall be the aggregate of|
|by all the transferee|transferor|01.10.2024|
|immovable|facility|It is clarified,|
|fee, incidental|in|the transferee|
|similar property.|the|parking fee or a|
|of nature|water of areof|from one|
|then|of the|deduction of|
|Time of|transferor|whichever|
|payment,|account at|er.|
|the or time|is earli|duty value, requirement|
|whichever|obtaining|.|
|Rate of|is higher|u/s.|
|TDS|No of|203A|
|Payee| |rural|
|section|compulsory|of|
|compensation|Payer|responsible|
|agricultural|immovable|acquisition|
|person paying|in 194LA|for|
|than land)|to|duty|
|tax at source|deduction of| |
|Threshold|Limit for|stamp|
|value)|© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India|property other|
|Nature of|payment|agricultural|
|than land|Section| |

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

transfer on whether or not on acquisition of agricultural property.

# Other relevant points

for the transferor such as compensation applicable in India, rural or urban.

|Time of deduction|At the time of credit of payment, whichever is earlier.|
|---|---|
|Rate of TDS|10%|
|Payee|Any resident person|
|Payer|Any company responsible for specified income|
|Threshold Limit for TDS|in aggregate Amount > 2,50,000|

# Nature of payment

the nature of capital gains on acquisition of immovable property other than compensation.

# Section

194K

194LA
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.56

income and no other pension except years or more at any account income

Other relevant points

individual, being a resident in India, citizen of Y.

Time during the P senior age received or received any interest

Specified means – is who deduction - -

Time of default tax specified in the option of shifting out of the regime.

Rate of TDS

Rates in force has exercised Rates

Payee Specified citizen senior banking of scheduled the

(other land situated in India) has been appointed as agents of RBI

compulsory compensation agricultural acquisition

Payer immovable property specified Notified 45

tax at source deduction of

Threshold Limit for exemption specified 3,00,000

case default

Basic limit (in pays on [

Nature of payment agricultural land in India) Pension interest (along with bank account)

Section 194P
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

which he is receiving furnishes any individual in the same giving a to senior deduct income; the of prescribed compute the total income such in effect to deduction under evidence furnished by the (on the basis of Other relevant points A.Y. citizen) bank furnished by to bank if maintained relevant specified bank.

pension declaration specified who - tax, VI specified declaration allowable and has the citizen income deduction - Chapter specified his form, Time of the default tax where the individual.

Rate of 115BAC, pays tax regime. TDS Payee Payer [i.e., income the out the case may of the default has exercised senior citizen tax at source the option of deduction of u/s giving A any.

Threshold Limit for Chapter VI providing deduction allowable if specified shifting 115BAC] to allowable exceed effect under should after basic total.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.58

No. senior deductible than of in been of The provisions of section allowable apply A.Y. Other relevant points

Notification 99/2021 dated 2.9.2021 filing P.Y. transactions on which deducted u/s 194P(1). collectible has specified the applicability of section 206C(1H) other provisions of the Act;

rebate would TDS u/s 194Q relating for to tax is under is 206C, u/s 87A, CBDT return a which - T Non Tr (a) (b) of the account such sum to of the seller deduction At the time of whichever is credit payment, the at time earlier.

|Time of|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
|0.1% of sum exceeding 50 lakhs|Any resident for paying any sum to any resident for purchase of goods.|Buyer, responsible person|Buyer gross total receipts|

the same 87A from tax limit. Further, tax at source deduction of is Threshold Limit for exemption individual case entitled rebate should 50 given year

Nature of payment Purchase goods Section 194Q
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

is account, of person be of the or 206(1H) and section 194Q such in kind or partly in cash and whether called “Suspense account” or by any other partly in kind but the part applies, tax is required to crediting.

# Other relevant points u/s 194Q.

For purposes of this section books to account wholly sum for benefit pay deemed both s any thethe such the is the ee be deducted.

Other point of the where name, income, here liable credit shall the W deduction.

# Time of

Providing before benefit of value of gate.

# Rate of TDS

10% of aggre.

# Payee

Any resident person whose business turnover during FY exceeds crores.

# Payer

Immediately preceding purchase out. (other HUF or of or of or).

# Threshold Limit for

Aggregate value benefit.

# Nature of payment

Convertible whether any.

# Section 194R
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.60

the before benefit or for or that of in such providing such benefit or in cash is not sufficient to in Other relevant points benefit liability tax benefit or perquisite responsible respect of whole of ensure of shall, been the respect of the e deduction , . perquisite perquisite th releasing perquisite meet person has p tax deduction

# Time of perquisite

benefit or

# Rate of TDS

Payee not in of in of the for for turnover receipts or sales, a a hs to of crore immediately

# Payer

lak profession responsible perquisite. responsible preceding providing company, resident, case “person gross exceed 50 during benefit total does 1 case case > or ` ` In 20,000 in a tax at source deduction of

# Threshold Limit for perquisite

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India F.Y. ` apply and into money or to any benefit from business arising a the perquisite, in in ly partly in kind.

# Nature of payment

of . profession provisions or cash exercise would whether not, or The or cash in Section
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# Other relevant points

|Time of deduction|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|Threshold Limit for|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|means|7.61|Principal company including Officer thereof.|paying theitself|the tax at source deduction of|
|Nature of payment|Section| | | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.62 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 10

Examine the applicability of the provisions for tax deduction at source under section 194DA in the following cases -

1. Mr. X, a resident, is due to receive ` 4.50 lakhs on 30.6.2024, towards maturity proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.7.2021, for which the sum assured is ` 4 lakhs and the annual premium is ` 1,25,000.
2. Mr. Y, a resident, is due to receive ` 3.95 lakhs on 31.12.2024 on LIC policy taken on 31.12.2011, for which the sum assured is ` 3.50 lakhs and the annual premium is ` 26,100.
3. Mr. Z, a resident, is due to receive ` 95,000 on 1.8.2024 towards maturity proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.8.2017 for which the sum assured is ` 90,000 and the annual premium was ` 10,000.

# SOLUTION

1. Since the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of a policy taken after 31.3.2012, the maturity proceeds of ` 4.50 lakhs due on 31.3.2024 are not exempt under section 10(10D) in the hands of Mr. X. Therefore, tax is required to be deducted @5% under section 194DA on the amount of income comprised therein i.e., on ` 75,000 (` 4,50,000, being maturity proceeds - ` 3,75,000, being the aggregate amount of insurance premium paid).
2. Since the annual premium is less than 20% of sum assured in respect of a policy taken before 1.4.2012, the sum of ` 3.95 lakhs due to Mr. Y would be exempt under section 10(10D) in his hands. Hence, no tax is required to be deducted at source under section 194DA on such sum payable to Mr. Y.
3. Even though the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of a policy taken after 31.3.2012, and consequently, the maturity proceeds of ` 95,000 due on 1.8.2024 would not be exempt under section 10(10D) in the hands of Mr. Z, the tax deduction provisions under section 194DA are not attracted since the maturity proceeds are less than ` 1 lakh.

# ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. X sold his house property in Bangalore as well as his rural agricultural land for a consideration of ` 60 lakh and ` 15 lakh, respectively, to Mr. Y on 1.8.2024. He has purchased the house property and the land in the year 2023 for ` 40 lakh and
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

10 lakh, respectively. The stamp duty value on the date of transfer, i.e., 1.8.2024, is ` 85 lakh and ` 20 lakh for the house property and rural agricultural land, respectively. Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. X and Mr. Y and the TDS implications, if any, in the hands of Mr. Y, assuming that both Mr. X and Mr. Y are resident Indians.

# SOLUTION

# (i) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. X

As per section 50C, the stamp duty value of house property (i.e. ` 85 lakh) would be deemed to be the full value of consideration arising on transfer of property, since the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the consideration received. Therefore, ` 45 lakh (i.e., ` 85 lakh – ` 40 lakh, being the purchase price) would be taxable as short-term capital gains in the A.Y.2025-26. Since rural agricultural land is not a capital asset, the gains arising on sale of such land is not taxable in the hands of Mr. X.

# (ii) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. Y

In case immovable property is received for inadequate consideration, the difference between the stamp value and actual consideration would be taxable under section 56(2)(x), if such difference exceeds the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of the consideration. Therefore, in this case ` 25 lakh (` 85 lakh – ` 60 lakh) would be taxable in the hands of Mr. Y under section 56(2)(x). Since agricultural land is not a capital asset, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of receipt of agricultural land for inadequate consideration, since the definition of “property” under section 56(2)(x) includes only capital assets specified thereunder.

# (iii) TDS implications in the hands of Mr. Y

Since the sale consideration of house property or the stamp duty value of house property exceeds ` 50 lakh, Mr. Y is required to deduct tax at source under section 194-IA. The tax to be deducted under section 194-IA would be ` 85,000, being 1% of ` 85 lakhs (higher of ` 60 lakhs or ` 85 lakhs). TDS provisions under section 194-IA are not attracted in respect of transfer of rural agricultural land.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.64 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 12

Mr. Sharma, a resident Indian aged 77 years, gets pension of ` 52,000 per month from the UP State Government. The same is credited to his savings account in SBI, Lucknow Branch. In addition, he gets interest @ 8% p.a. on fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh with the said bank. Out of the deposit of ` 20 lakh, ` 2 lakh represents five year term deposit made by him on 1.4.2024. Interest on savings bank credited to his SBI savings account for the P.Y.2024-25 is ` 9,500.

1. From the above facts, compute the total income and tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. What would be the amount of tax deductible at source by SBI, assuming that the same is a specified bank? Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income for A.Y.2025-26, if tax deductible at source has been fully deducted? Examine.
3. Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income for A.Y. 2025-26, if the fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh was with Canara Bank instead of SBI, other facts remaining the same?

# SOLUTION

# (1) Computation of total income of Mr. Sharma for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|I Salaries| | |
|Pension (` 52,000 x 12)|6,24,000| |
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|50,000| |
| | |5,74,000|
|II Income from Other Sources| | |
|Interest on fixed deposit (` 20 lakh x 8%)|1,60,000| |
|Interest on savings account|9,500|1,69,500|
|Gross total income| |7,43,500|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A| | |
|Under Section 80C| | |
|Five year term deposit (` 2 lakh, restricted to ` 1.5 lakh)|1,50,000| |

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Under section 80TTB

Interest on fixed deposit and savings account, restricted to 50,000, since Mr. Sharma is a resident Indian of the age of 77 years.

Total Income: 5,43,500

# Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Tax payable [` 43,500 x 20% + ` 10,000]|18,700|
|Add: Health and Education Cess@4%|748|
|Tax liability|19,448|
|Tax liability (rounded off)|19,450|

(2) SBI, being a specified bank, is required to deduct tax at source u/s 194P and remit the same to the Central Government. In such a case, Mr. Sharma would not be required to file his return of income u/s 139.

(3) If the fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh is with a bank other than SBI, which is the bank where his pension is credited, then, Mr. Sharma would not qualify as a “specified senior citizen”. In this case, Mr. Sharma would have to file his return of income u/s 139, since his total income (without giving effect to deduction under Chapter VI-A) exceeds the basic exemption limit.

# 3.13 Income payable “net of tax” [Section 195A]

(1) Where, under an agreement or other arrangement, the tax chargeable on any income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter is to be borne by the person by whom the income is payable, then, for the purposes of deduction of tax under those provisions such income shall be increased to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon, be equal to the net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.

(2) However, no grossing up is required in the case of tax paid under section 192(1A) by an employer on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the employee.

(3) When an amount is paid net of tax, the taxability has to be calculated by grossing up the amount, since the tax itself represents the income of the payee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.66 INCOME TAX LAW

# 3.14 Interest or dividend or other sums payable to Government, Reserve Bank or certain corporations [Section 196]

(1) No deduction of tax shall be made by any person from any sums payable to -

- (i) the Government; or
- (ii) the Reserve Bank of India; or
- (iii) a corporation established by or under a Central Act, which is, under any law for the time being in force, exempt from income-tax on its income; or
- (iv) a Mutual Fund¹.

(2) This provision for non-deduction is applicable when such sum is payable to the above entities by way of -

- (i) interest or dividend in respect of securities or shares -
- - (a) owned by the above entities; or
- (b) in which they have full beneficial interest or

(ii) any income accruing or arising to them.

# 4. CERTIFICATE FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT A LOWER RATE [SECTION 197]

(1) This section applies where, in the case of any income of any person or sum payable to any person, income-tax is required to be deducted at the time of credit or payment, as the case may be, at the rates in force as per the provisions of sections 192, 193, 194, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I, 194J, 194K, 194LA, 194M and 194Q*.

* With effect from 01.10.2024, 194Q has been inserted within the scope of section 197 to provide an option to seek a lower deduction certificate.

(2) In such cases, the assessee can make an application to the Assessing Officer for deduction of tax at a lower rate or for non-deduction of tax.

(3) If the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the recipient justifies the deduction of income-tax at lower rates or no deduction of tax.

¹ Specified under section 10(23D)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

income-tax, as the case may be, he may give to the assessee such certificate, as may be appropriate.

(4) Where the Assessing Officer issues such a certificate, then the person responsible for paying the income shall deduct income-tax at such lower rates specified in the certificate or deduct no tax, as the case may be, until such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer.

(5) Enabling powers have been conferred upon the CBDT to make rules for prescribing the procedure in this regard.

# 5. NO DEDUCTION IN CERTAIN CASES [SECTION 197A]

(1) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for receipt of dividend without deduction of tax [Sub-section (1)]

(i) This section enables an individual, who is resident in India and whose estimated total income of the previous year is less than the basic exemption limit, to receive dividend, without deduction of tax at source under section 194 on furnishing a declaration in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form 15G] and verified in the prescribed manner.

(ii) The declaration in the above form is to be furnished in writing in duplicate by the declarant to the person responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in section 194. The declaration will have to be to the effect that the tax on the estimated total income of the declarant of the previous year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income will be Nil.

(2) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for non-deduction of tax under section 192A or 193 or 194A or 194D or 194DA or 194-I or 194K by persons, other than companies and firms [Sub-section (1A)]

No deduction of tax shall be made under the above provisions of the Act, where a person, who is not a company or a firm, furnishes to the person responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in these sections, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form 15G] to the effect that the tax on his estimated total income of the previous year will be Nil.
# 7.68 INCOME TAX LAW

year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income will be Nil.

(3) Filing declaration not permissible if income/aggregate of incomes exceed basic exemption limit [Sub-section (1B)]

Declaration cannot be furnished as per the above provisions, where -

- (i) payments of dividend; or
- (ii) payment of premature withdrawal from Employee Provident Fund; or
- (iii) income from interest on securities or
- (iv) interest other than “interest on securities” or units; or
- (v) insurance commission; or
- (vi) payment in respect of life insurance policy; or
- (vii) rent; or
- (viii) income from units; or
- (ix) the aggregate of the amounts of such incomes in (i) to (viii) above credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year in which such income is to be included exceeds the basic exemption limit.

(4) Enabling provision for filing of declaration by resident senior citizens for non-deduction of tax at source [Sub-section (1C)]

For a resident individual, who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the previous year, no deduction of tax shall be made under section 192A or section 193 or section 194 or section 194A or section 194D or section 194DA or section 194EE or section 194-I or section 194K, if such individual furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate in Form 15H to the payer, that tax on his estimated total income of the previous year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income is Nil. The restriction contained in sub-section (1B) will not apply to resident senior citizens.

(5) Non-deduction of tax in certain cases

Payments to notified person or class of persons including institutions/class of institutions etc. [Sub-section (1F)]

No deduction of tax shall be made or deduction of tax shall be made at such lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons, including institution, association or body or class of institutions or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

associations or bodies as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf. Therefore, in respect of such payments made to notified person or class of persons, no tax is to be deducted at source or tax is to be deducted at lower rate.

# 6. Time limit for delivery of one copy of declaration [Sub-section (2)]

On receipt of the declaration referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A) or (1C), the person responsible for making the payment will be required to deliver or cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, one copy of the declaration on or before the 7th of the month following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.

# 6. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

# 6.1 Tax deducted is income received [Section 198]

(1) All sums deducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall, for the purpose of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be income received.

(2) However, the following tax paid or deducted would not be deemed to be income received by the assessee for the purpose of computing the total income –

- (i) the tax paid by an employer under section 192(1A) on non-monetary perquisites provided to the employees
- (ii) tax deducted under section 194N

# 6.2 Credit for tax deducted at source [Section 199]

(1) Tax deducted at source in accordance with the above provisions and paid to the credit of the Central Government shall be treated as payment of tax on behalf of the-

- (i) person from whose income the deduction was made; or
- (ii) owner of the security; or
- (iii) depositor; or
- (iv) owner of property; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.70 INCOME TAX LAW

(v) unit-holder; or

(vi) shareholder.

(2) Any sum referred to in section 192(1A) and paid to the Central Government, shall be treated as the tax paid on behalf of the person in respect of whose income, such payment of tax has been made.

(3) The CBDT is empowered to frame rules for the purpose of giving credit in respect of tax deducted or tax paid under Chapter XVII. The CBDT also has the power to make rules for giving credit to a person other than the persons mentioned in (1) and (2) above. Further, the CBDT can specify the assessment year for which such credit may be given.

# 6.3 Duty of person deducting tax [Section 200]

(1) The persons responsible for deducting the tax at source should deposit the sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs, within the prescribed time.

(2) Further, an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites provided to employees in accordance with section 192(1A), should deposit within the prescribed time, the tax to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.

(3) Rule 30 prescribes the time and mode of payment to Government account of TDS or tax paid under section 192(1A) and Rule 31A provides for submission of quarterly statements by every person responsible for deduction of tax [depicted in the diagram given in page 7.75]. However, every person responsible for deduction of tax under section 194-IA, 194-IB or 194M have to furnish to the Principal Director General of Income-tax (Systems) (in case of sections 194-IB and 194M) or Director General of Income-tax (System) or the person authorised by them, a challan-cum-statement in Form No.26QB, 26QC or 26QD respectively, within thirty days from the end of the month of deduction of tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 6.4 Correction of arithmetic mistakes and adjustment of incorrect claim during computerized processing of TDS and other statements [Section 200A]

(1) At present, all statements of tax deducted at source are filed in an electronic mode, thereby facilitating computerised processing of these statements. Therefore, in order to process TDS statements on computer, electronic processing on the same lines as processing of income-tax returns has been provided in section 200A.

(2) The following adjustments can be made during the computerized processing of statement of tax deducted at source or a correction statement –

- (i) any arithmetical error in the statement; or
- (ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any information in the statement.

(3) The term “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the statement” shall mean such claim on the basis of an entry, in the statement,–

- (i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or some other item in such statement;
- (ii) in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source, where such rate is not in accordance with the provisions of the Act.

(4) The interest, if any, has to be computed on the basis of the sums deductible as computed in the statement;

(5) The fee, if any, has to be computed in accordance with the provision of section 234E. A fee of ` 200 for every day would be levied under section 234E for late furnishing of TDS statement from the due date of furnishing of TDS statement to the date of furnishing of TDS/ statement. However, the total amount of fee shall not exceed the total amount of tax deductible/collectible and such fee has to be paid before delivering the TDS statement.

(6) The sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the deductor has to be determined after adjustment of interest and fee against the amount paid under section 200 or section 201 or section 234E and any amount paid otherwise by way of tax or interest or fee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.72 INCOME TAX LAW

(7) An intimation will be prepared and generated and sent to the deductor, specifying his tax liability or the refund due, within one year from the end of the financial year in which the statement is filed. The refund due shall be granted to the deductor.

(8) For this purpose, the CBDT is empowered to make a scheme for centralized processing of statements of TDS to determine the tax payable by, or refund due to, the deductor. The Board may make a scheme for processing of statements made by any other person, not being a deductor.

# 6.5 Consequences of failure to deduct or pay [Section 201]

(1) Deemed assessee-in-default Any person including the principal officer of a company -

- (i) who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions of the Act; or
- (ii) an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A).

shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-default, if he does not deduct, or does not pay or after deducting, fails to pay, the whole or any part of the tax, as required by or under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

(2) Non-applicability of deeming provision Any person (including the principal officer of the company) who fails to deduct the whole or any part of the tax on the amount credited or paid to a payee shall not be deemed to be an assessee-in-default in respect of such tax if such payee –

- (i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
- (ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
- (iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,

and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# Interest Liability

(i) A person deemed to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1), for failure to deduct tax or to pay the tax after deduction, is liable to pay simple interest @ 1% for every month or part of month on the amount of such tax from the date on which tax was deductible to the date on which such tax was actually deducted and simple interest @ 1½% for every month or part of month from the date on which tax was deducted to the date on which such tax is actually paid [Section 201(1A)].

(ii) Such interest should be paid before furnishing the statements in accordance with section 200(3).

(iii) Where the payer fails to deduct the whole or any part of the tax on the amount credited or payment made to a payee and is not deemed to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1) on account of payment of taxes by such payee, interest under section 201(1A)(i) i.e., @1% p.m. or part of month, shall be payable by the payer from the date on which such tax was deductible to the date of furnishing of return of income by such payee. The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee. However, where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for assessee-in-default, the interest shall be paid by the person in accordance with such order.

(iv) Where the tax has not been paid after it is deducted, the amount of the tax together with the amount of simple interest thereon shall be a charge upon all the assets of the person or the company, as the case may be.

# Certificate for tax deducted [Section 203]

(1) Every person deducting tax at source have to issue a certificate to the effect that tax has been deducted and specify the amount so deducted, the rate at which tax has been deducted and such other particulars as may be prescribed.

(2) Every person, being an employer, referred to in section 192(1A) shall, within such period, as may be prescribed, furnish to the person in respect of whose income such payment of tax has been made, a certificate to the effect that tax has been paid to the Central Government, and specify the amount so.
# 7.74 INCOME TAX LAW

paid, the rate at which the tax has been paid and such other particulars as may be prescribed.

# (3) Certificate of TDS to be furnished under section 203 [Rule 31]

The certificate of deduction of tax at source to be furnished under section 203 shall be in Form No.16 in respect of tax deducted or paid under section 192 and in any other case, Form No.16A.

Form No.16 shall be issued to the employee annually by 15ᵗʰ June of the financial year immediately following the financial year in which the income was paid and tax deducted. Form No.16A shall be issued quarterly within 15 days from the due date for furnishing the statement of TDS under Rule 31A.

Form No. 16B, 16C or 16D shall be issued by the every person responsible for deduction of tax under section 194-IA, 194-IB or 194M to the payee within fifteen days from the due date for furnishing the challan-cum-statement in Form No. 26QB, 26QC or 26QD, respectively, under rule 31A.

Note – The entire TDS process can be understood at a glance from the diagram given in the next page. The reference to Rules and Forms are only for the information of students. They are, however, not required to memorize the Rule numbers and Form numbers for examination purposes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# Deduction of tax at source

# Sections 193, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I/IA/IB, 194J, 194K, 194M, 194Q

Deduct tax at the time of credit to the a/c of the payee or payment, whichever is earlier

# Sections 192, 192A, 194, 194B, 194BB, 194DA, 194LA, 194N, 194P², 194R

Deduct tax at the time of payment Remittance [Rule 30]

|Tax deducted by an office of Govt.|Other deductors| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Where tax is paid without production of an IT challan|(i) Cases (other than (ii), (iii) & (iv)| | | | |
| |#|(ii)|(iii)|(iv)|(iv)|
|u/s 192/194A/194D/194H|u/s 194IA|u/s 194IB|u/s 194M| | |

Income/Amt is credited or paid in March

|On the same day|On or before 7 days from the end of the month of deduction|30ᵗʰ April|On or before 7 days from the end of the month of dedn.|
|---|---|---|---|
|Qtly payt|30 days from the end of the month of deduction|7ᵗʰ July/7ᵗʰ Oct/7ᵗʰ Jan/30ᵗʰ April| |

# PAO/TO/CDDO

Furnishing Stt of TDS [Rule 31A]

|Rule 31A - Furnish Challan-cum-stt in Form|Qtr ending|Due date| |
|---|---|---|---|
| |30ᵗʰ June|31ˢᵗ July| |
| |30ᵗʰ Sep|31ˢᵗ Oct| |
| |31ˢᵗ Dec|31ˢᵗ Jan| |
| |31St March|31ˢᵗ May| |

Where Stt relates to other months

# Furnishing Certificate of TDS

Rule 31 - Furnish Certificate to the payee within 15 days from the above due date in Form

|Form 16|Form 16A|
|---|---|
|By 15ᵗʰ June of the immediately following F.Y.|Within 15 days from the due date for furnishing TDS statement|

# In special cases, the A.O. may, with the prior approval of the JC, permit quarterly payment of TDS

²TDS is required to be deducted at the time of payment, if declaration is furnished by the specified senior citizen

³If deduction of tax is under section 192 or 194P

⁴If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of deductee who is a non-corporate non-resident or a foreign company or RNOR

⁵If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of all other deductees

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.76 INCOME TAX LAW

# 6.7 Person responsible for paying taxes deducted at source

[Section 204]

For purposes of deduction of tax at source the expression “person responsible for paying” means:

|Nature of income/payment|Person responsible for paying tax|
|---|---|
|(1) Salary (other than payment of salaries by the Central or State Government)|(i) the employer himself; or (ii) if the employer is a company, the company itself, including the principal officer thereof.|
|(2) Interest on securities (other than the payments by or on behalf of the Central or State Government)|the local authority, corporation or company, including the principal officer thereof.|
|(3) Any sum payable to a non-resident Indian, representing consideration for the transfer by him of any foreign exchange asset, which is not a short term capital asset|the “Authorised Person” responsible for remitting such sum to the non-resident Indian or for crediting such sum to his Non-resident (External) Account maintained in accordance with the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and any rules made thereunder.|
|(4) furnishing of information relating to payment to a non-corporate non-resident, or to a foreign company, of any sum, whether or not chargeable under the provisions of this Act|(i) the payer himself; or (ii) if the payer is a company, the company itself including the principal officer thereof.|
|(5) Credit/payment of any other sum chargeable under the provisions of the Act|(i) the payer himself; or (ii) if the payer is a company, the company itself including the principal officer thereof.|
|(6) Credit/payment of any sum chargeable under the provisions of the Act made by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Government of a State.|(i) the drawing and disbursing officer; or (ii) any other person, by whatever name called, responsible for crediting, or as the case may be, paying such sum.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

7.77

# (7)

In case of a person not resident in India (irrespective of the nature of payment or income)

- (i) the person himself; or
- (ii) any person authorized by such person; or
- (iii) the agent of such person in India including any person treated as an agent under section 163.

# 6.8 Bar against direct demand on assessee [Section 205]

Where tax is deductible at source under any of the aforesaid sections, the assessee shall not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax has been deducted from that income.

# 6.9 Mandatory requirement of furnishing PAN in all TDS statements, bills, vouchers and correspondence between deductor and deductee [Section 206AA]

1. The non-furnishing of PAN by deductees in many cases have led to delay in issue of refund on account of problems in the processing of returns of income and in granting credit for tax deducted at source.
2. With a view to strengthening the PAN mechanism, section 206AA provides that any person whose receipts are subject to deduction of tax at source i.e. the deductee, shall mandatorily furnish his PAN to the deductor failing which the deductor shall deduct tax at source at higher of the following rates –

- (i) the rate prescribed in the Act;
- (ii) at the rate in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
- (iii) at the rate of 20%. [5% in case tax is required to be deducted at source u/s 194Q]

For instance, in case of rental payment for plant and machinery, where the payee does not furnish his PAN to the payer, tax would be deductible @20% instead of @2% prescribed under section 194-I. However, non-furnishing of PAN by the deductee in case of income by way of winnings from lotteries, card games etc., would result in tax being deducted at the existing rate of 30% under section 194B. Therefore, wherever tax is deductible at a rate higher than 20%, this provision would not have any impact.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.78 INCOME TAX LAW

(3) Tax would be deductible at the rates mentioned above also in cases where the taxpayer files a declaration in Form 15G or 15H (under section 197A) but does not provide his PAN.

(4) Further, no certificate under section 197 will be granted by the Assessing Officer unless the application contains the PAN of the applicant.

(5) Both the deductor and the deductee have to compulsorily quote the PAN of the deductee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other documents exchanged between them.

(6) If the PAN provided to the deductor is invalid or it does not belong to the deductee, it shall be deemed that the deductee has not furnished his PAN to the deductor. Accordingly, tax would be deductible at the rate specified in (2) above.

Note: The applicability of provisions of section 206AA on non-resident will be dealt with at the Final Level.

# 6.10 Higher rate of TDS for non-filers of income-tax return [Section 206AB]

(1) Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of this Chapter on any sum or income or amount paid, or payable or credited, by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates –

- (i) at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provisions of the Act;
- (ii) at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
- (iii) at 5%

However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M or 194N.

(2) In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified person, in addition to the provisions of this section, then, tax is required to be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and section 206AB.

6 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(3) Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous year.

However, the specified person would not include

- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India7; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by the Central Government in this behalf.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 45/2024 dated 27.5.2024, notified the RBI as a person to not include in the definition of specified person.

# ADVANCE PAYMENT OF TAX [SECTIONS 207 TO 219]

# 7.1 Liability for payment of advance tax

(1) Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in accordance with the provisions of sections 208 to 219, in respect of an assessee’s current income i.e. the total income of the assessee which would be chargeable to tax for the assessment year immediately following that financial year [Section 207].

(2) Under section 208, obligation to pay advance tax arises in every case where the advance tax payable is ` 10,000 or more.

Note - An assessee who is liable to pay advance tax of less than ` 10,000 will not be saddled with interest under sections 234B and 234C for defaults in

7 “Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.80 INCOME TAX LAW

payment of advance tax. However, the consequences under section 234A regarding interest for belated filing of return would be attracted.

# (3)

In case of senior citizens who have passive source of income like interest, rent, etc., the requirement of payment of advance tax causes genuine compliance hardship. Therefore, in order to reduce the compliance burden on such senior citizens, exemption from payment of advance tax has been provided to a resident individual-

- (i) not having any income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”; and
- (ii) of the age of 60 years or more.

Such senior citizens need not pay advance tax and are allowed to discharge their tax liability (other than TDS) by payment of self-assessment tax.

# 7.2 Computation of advance tax

1. An assessee has to estimate his current income and pay advance tax thereon. He need not submit any estimate or statement of income to the Assessing Officer, except where he has been served with notice by the Assessing Officer.
2. Where an obligation to pay advance tax has arisen, the assessee shall himself compute the advance tax payable on his current income at the rates in force in the financial year and deposit the same, whether or not he has been earlier assessed to tax.
3. In the case of a person who has been already assessed by way of a regular assessment in respect of the total income of any previous year, the Assessing Officer, if he is of the opinion that such person is liable to pay advance tax, may serve an order under section 210(3) requiring the assessee to pay advance tax.
4. For this purpose, the total income of the latest previous year in respect of which the assessee has been assessed by way of regular assessment or the total income returned by the assessee in any return of income for any subsequent previous year, whichever is higher, shall be taken as the basis for computation of advance tax payable.
5. The above order can be served by the Assessing Officer at any time during the financial year but not later than the last date of February.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(6) If, after sending the above notice, but before 1st March of the financial year, the assessee furnishes a return relating to any later previous year or an assessment is completed in respect of a later return of income, the Assessing Officer may amend the order for payment of advance tax on the basis of the computation of the income so returned or assessed.

(7) If the assessee feels that his own estimate of advance tax payable would be less than the one sent by the Assessing Officer, he can file estimate of his current income and advance tax payable thereon.

(8) Where the advance tax payable on assessee’s estimation is higher than the tax computed by the Assessing Officer, then, the advance tax shall be paid based upon such higher amount.

(9) In all cases, the tax calculated shall be reduced by the amount of tax deductible at source.

# No reduction of ‘tax deductible but not deducted’ while computing advance tax liability

(i) As per the provisions of section 209, the amount of advance tax payable by a person is computed by reducing the amount of income-tax which would be deductible at source during the financial year from any income which has been taken into account in computing the total income.

(ii) Some courts have opined that in case where the payer pays any amount (on which tax is deductible at source) without deduction of tax at source, the payee shall not be liable to pay advance tax to the extent tax is deductible from such amount.

(iii) With a view to make such a person (payee) liable to pay advance tax, the proviso to section 209(1)(d) provides that the amount of tax deductible at source but not so deducted by the payer shall not be reduced from the income tax liability of the payee for determining his liability to pay advance tax.

(iv) In effect, only if tax has actually been deducted at source, the same can be reduced for computing advance tax liability of the payee. Tax deductible but not so deducted cannot be reduced for computing advance tax liability of the payee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.82 INCOME TAX LAW

(10) The amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year calculated by -

- (i) the assessee himself based on his estimation of current income; or
- (ii) the Assessing Officer as a result of an order under section 210(3) or amended order under section 210(4)

is subject to the provisions of section 209(2), as per which the net agricultural income has to be considered for the purpose of computing advance tax.

# 7.3 Instalments of advance tax and due dates

(1) Common advance tax payment schedule for both corporates and non-corporates [Other than assessees computing profits on presumptive basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)]:

|Due date of instalment|Amount payable|
|---|---|
|On or before 15th June|Not less than 15% of advance tax liability|
|On or before 15th September|Not less than 45% of advance tax liability, as reduced by the amount, if any, paid in the earlier instalment.|
|On or before 15th December|Not less than 75% of advance tax liability, as reduced by the amount or amounts, if any, paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.|
|On or before 15th March|The whole amount of advance tax liability as reduced by the amount or amounts, if any, paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.|

Note - Any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31ˢᵗ March shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending on 31st March.

(2) Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)

An eligible assessee, opting for computation of profits or gains of business on presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 44AD(1) or for computation of profits or gains of profession on presumptive basis in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

be required to pay advance tax of the whole amount in one instalment on or before 15th March of the financial year. However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending on 31st March.

1. If the last day for payment of any instalment of advance tax is a day on which the receiving bank is closed, the assessee can make the payment on the next immediately following working day, and in such cases, the interest leviable under sections 234B and 234C would not be charged.
2. Where advance tax is payable by virtue of the notice of demand issued8 by the Assessing Officer, the whole or the appropriate part of the advance tax specified in such notice shall be payable on or before each of such due dates as fall after the date of service of notice of demand.
3. Where the assessee does not pay any instalment by the due date, he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such instalment.

# 7.4 Credit for advance tax [Section 219]

Any sum, other than interest or penalty, paid by or recovered from an assessee as advance tax, is treated as a payment of tax in respect of the income of the previous year and credit thereof shall be given in the regular assessment.

# 7.5 Interest for non-payment or short-payment of advance tax [Section 234B]

1. Interest under section 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or payment of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.
2. The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from 1st April following the financial year up to the date of determination of income under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, up to the date of such regular assessment.
3. Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the assessed tax and the advance tax paid.

under section 156

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.84 INCOME TAX LAW

(4) Assessed tax is the tax calculated on total income determined under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, the tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment less

- tax deducted or collected at source.
- any relief of tax allowed under section 89
- any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) would not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143. Tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment would not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B. Section 140B is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.

(5) However, where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee under section 140A or otherwise, interest shall be calculated up to the date of payment of such tax and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 140A towards the interest chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall be calculated at 1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.

# 7.6 Interest payable for deferment of advance tax [Section 234C]

(1) Manner of computation of interest under section 234C for deferment of advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:

In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the dates specified in column (1) is less than the specified percentage [given in column (2)] of tax due on returned income, then simple interest @1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on the amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable under section 234C.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Specified date|Specified %|Shortfall in advance tax|Period|
|---|---|---|---|
|15ᵗʰ June|15%|15% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ June|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ September|45%|45% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ September|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ December|75%|75% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ December|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ March|100%|100% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ March|1 month|

Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on those dates.

# Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):

In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), as the case may be, who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall from the tax due on the returned income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.86 INCOME TAX LAW

# (3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:

Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on account of under-estimation of or failure to estimate –

- (i) the amount of capital gains;
- (ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;
- (iii) income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in cases where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the first time.
- (iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred u/s 2(22)(e)

However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), as the case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such instalments are due, by 31ˢᵗ March of the financial year.

# (4) Meaning of tax due on returned income

Tax due on returned income means the tax calculated on total income declared in the return furnished by the assessee less

- - tax deducted or collected at source
- - any relief of tax allowed under section 89
- - any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# 8. TAX COLLECTION AT SOURCE

# (1) Applicability and Rates

(i) Sale of certain goods

Under section 206C(1), sellers of certain goods are required to collect tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified percentage for collection of tax at source is as follows:
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Nature of Goods|Percentage|
|---|---|
|(a) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption|1%|
|(b) Tendu leaves|5%|
|(c) Timber obtained under a forest lease|2.5%|
|(d) Timber obtained by any mode other than (c)|2.5%|
|(e) Any other forest produce not being timber or tendu leaves|2.5%|
|(f) Scrap|1%|
|(g) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore|1%|

The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the buyer, whichever is earlier.

# Non-applicability of TCS u/s 206C(1) [Section 206C(1A)]

No collection of tax shall be made under section 206C(1), in the case of a resident buyer, if such buyer furnishes to the person responsible for collecting tax, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effect that goods referred to in section 206C(1) above are to be utilised for the purpose of manufacturing, processing or producing articles or things or for the purposes of generation of power and not for trading purposes.

# (ii) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry

Section 206C(1C) provides for collection of tax by every person who grants a lease or a licence or enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest in any:

- parking lot or
- toll plaza or
- a mine or a quarry

to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of
# 7.88 INCOME TAX LAW

business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at the rate of 2%.

Mining and quarrying would not include mining and quarrying of mineral oil. Mineral oil includes petroleum and natural gas.

The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the licensee or lessee to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the licensee or lessee, whichever is earlier.

# (iii) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs

Section 206C(1F) provides that every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer @1% of the sale consideration.

With effect from 01.01.2025, the scope of section 206C(1F) has been expanded to include every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of any other notified goods exceeding ` 10 lakhs, to, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer @1% of the sale consideration.

# (iv) Remittance under LRS of RBI through an authorized dealer or purchase of an overseas tour package

Section 206C(1G) provides for collection of tax by every person, being an authorized dealer, who receives amount, under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the RBI, for remittance from a buyer, being a person remitting such amount;

- being a seller of an overseas tour programme package who receives any amount from the buyer who purchases the package.

Tax has to be collected at the time of debiting the amount payable by the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer, by any mode, whichever is earlier.

Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of an overseas tour programme package

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|S. No.|Amount and purpose of remittance|Rate of TCS|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Where the amount is for purchase of an overseas tour programme package|5% till ` 7 lakhs, 20% thereafter|
|(ii)|Where the amount is remitted outside India -|No TCS upto ` 7 lakhs|
|(a)|for the purpose of education or medical treatment|5% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|
| |If amount remitted is out of a loan obtained from any financial institution as defined in section 80E, for the purpose of pursuing any education|0.5% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|
|(b)|where the amount is remitted for the purpose other than mentioned in (a)|20% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|

# Cases where no tax is to be collected

1. No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of which the sum has been collected by the seller
2. No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax
3. No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign State, a local authority9 or any other person notified by the Central Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions stipulated thereunder.

9 as defined in Explanation to section 10(20)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.90 INCOME TAX LAW

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated 17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) would not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-resident in India in terms of section 6 and does not have a permanent establishment in India.

# (v) Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh

(a) As per section 206C(1H), tax is also required to be collected by a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of goods of the value or aggregate of such value exceeding ` 50 lakhs in a previous year [other than exported goods or goods covered under sub-sections (1)/(1F)/(1G)].

(b) Tax is to be collected at source @0.1% u/s 206C(1H) of the sale consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs, at the time of receipt of consideration.

(c) Tax is, however, not required to be collected if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act on the goods purchased by him from the seller and has deducted such tax.

# (vi) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines

In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of section 206C(1G)/(1H), the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines, with the approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person liable to collect tax.

In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the approval of Central Government, vide this circular, issued the following guidelines for removing certain difficulties –

Question 1: Whether payment through overseas credit card would be counted in LRS?

Answer: No TCS shall be applicable on expenditure through international credit card while being overseas till further order.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Question 2: Whether the threshold of ` 7 lakh, for TCS to become applicable on LRS, applies separately for various purposes like education, health treatment and others? For example, if remittance of ` 7 lakh under LRS is made in a financial year for education purpose and other remittances in the same financial year of ` 7 lakh is made for medical treatment and ` 7 lakh for other purposes, whether the exemption limit of ` 7 lakh shall be given to each of the three separately?

Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 7 lakh for LRS is combined threshold for applicability of the TCS on LRS irrespective of the purpose of the remittance. Thus, in the given example, upto ` 7 lakh remittance under LRS during a financial year shall not be liable for TCS. However, subsequent ` 14 lakh remittance under LRS shall be liable for TCS in accordance with the TCS rates applicable for such remittance. TCS rates would be applicable as under:

|Remittances|Rate of TCS|
|---|---|
|First ` 7 lakh remittance under LRS during the financial year 2024-25 for education purpose (or for that matter any purpose)|No TCS|
|Remittances beyond ` 7 lakh under LRS during the financial year 2024-25|TCS at 0.5% (if it is for education purpose financed by loan from financial institution), 5% (if it is for education or medical treatment) and 20% (if it is for other purposes)|

Question 3: Whether the threshold of ` 7 lakh, for TCS to become applicable on LRS, applies separately for each remittance through different authorised dealers? If not, how will authorised dealer know about the earlier remittances by that remitter through some other authorised dealer?

Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 7 lakh for LRS is qua remitter and not qua authorised dealer. Since the facility to provide real time update of remittance under LRS by remitter is still under
# 7.92 INCOME TAX LAW

development by the RBl, it is clarified that the details of earlier remittances under LRS by the remitter during the financial year may be taken by the authorised dealer through an undertaking at the time of remittance. If the authorised dealer correctly collects the tax at source based on information given in this undertaking, he will not be treated as "assessee in default". However, for any false information in the undertaking, appropriate action may be taken against the remitter under the Act.

It is further clarified that same methodology of taking undertaking from the buyer of overseas tour program package may be followed by the seller of such package.

# Question 4:

There is threshold of ` 7 lakh for remittance under LRS for TCS to become applicable while there is another threshold of ` 7 lakh for purchase of overseas tour program package where reduced rate of 5% of TCS applies. Whether these two thresholds apply independently?

# Answer:

Yes, these two thresholds apply independently. For LRS, the threshold of ` 7 lakh applies to make TCS applicable. For purchase of overseas tour program package, the threshold of ` 7 lakh applies to determine the applicable TCS rate as 5% or 20%.

# Question 5:

A resident individual spends ` 3 lakh for purchase of overseas tour program package from a foreign tour operator and remits money which is classified under LRS. There is no other remittance under LRS or purchase of overseas tour program during the financial year. Whether TCS is applicable?

# Answer:

In case of purchase of overseas tour program package which is classified under LRS, TCS provision for purchase of overseas tour program package shall apply and not TCS provisions for remittance under LRS. Since for purchase of overseas tour program package, the threshold of ` 7 lakh for applicability of TCS does not apply, TCS is applicable and tax is required to be collected by the seller. In this case the tax shall be required to be collected at 5% since the total amount spent on purchase of overseas tour program package during the financial year is less than ` 7 lakh. The TCS should be made by the seller.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

7.93

# Question 6:

There are different rates for remittance under LRS for medical treatment/education purposes and for other purposes. What is the scope of remittance under LRS for medical treatment/education purposes?

# Answer:

As per the clarification by the RBI, remittance for the purposes of medical treatment shall include,

- (i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person to be treated medically overseas (and his attendant) for commuting between India and the overseas destination;
- (ii) his medical expense; and
- (iii) other day to day expenses required for such purpose.

Education remittance for purpose of education shall include,

- (i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person undertaking study overseas for commuting between India and the overseas destination;
- (ii) the tuition and other fees to be paid to educational institute; and
- (iii) other day to day expenses required for undertaking such study.

# Question 7:

Whether purchase of international travel ticket or hotel accommodation on standalone basis is purchase of overseas tour program package?

# Answer:

The term 'overseas tour program package' is defined as to mean any tour package which offers visit to a country or countries or territory or territories outside India and includes expenses for travel or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar nature or in relation thereto.

It is clarified that purchase of only international travel ticket or purchase of only hotel accommodation, by in itself is not covered within the definition of 'overseas tour program package'. To qualify as 'overseas tour program package', the package should include at least two of the followings:

- (i) international travel ticket,
- (ii) hotel accommodation (with or without food)/boarding/lodging,
- (iii) any other expenditure of similar nature or in relation thereto.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.94 INCOME TAX LAW

# (2) Meaning of certain terms

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(i) Overseas tour program package|For section 206C(1G) Any tour package which offers visit to a country/(ies) or territory/(ies) outside India. It includes expenses for travel or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar nature or in relation thereto. [Clause (ii) of Explanation to section 206C(1G)]|
|(ii) Buyer|For section 206C(1H): A person who purchases any goods but does not include – (A) the Central Government, a State Government, an embassy, a High Commission, legation, commission, consulate and the trade representation of a foreign State, or (B) a local authority⁷; or (C) a person importing goods into India or any other person as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for this purpose, subject to stipulated conditions. For section 206C(1): A person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction, tender, or any other mode, goods of the nature specified in the Table in point (1) or the right to receive any such goods but does not include – (A) a public sector company, the Central Government, a State Government, and an embassy, a high commission, legation, commission, consulate and the trade representation, of a foreign State and a club, or (B) a buyer in the retail sale of such goods purchased by him for personal consumption [Explanation to section 206C] For section 206C(1F): A person who obtains in any sale, goods of the nature specified therein, but does not include – (A) the Central Government, a State Government|

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

and an embassy, a High Commission, legation, commission, consulate and the trade representation of a foreign State; or

(B) a local authority; or

(C) a public sector company which is engaged in the business of carrying passengers. [Explanation to section 206C]

# (iii) Seller For section 206C(1H):

A person whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business carried on by him exceed ` 10 crores during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which sale of goods is carried out. However, seller does not include a person as notified by the Central Government for this purpose, subject to fulfillment of the stipulated conditions [Clause (b) of Explanation to section 206C(1H)]

# For section 206C(1) and section 206C(1F):

(i) The Central Government,

(ii) a State Government or

(iii) any local authority or

(iv) corporation or

(v) authority established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or

(vi) any company or

(vii) firm or

(viii) co-operative society

Seller also includes an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the goods of the nature specified in the Table in point (1) are sold. [Explanation to section 206C]

# (iv) Scrap

Waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical working of materials which is definitely not usable as such because of breakage, cutting up, wear and other reasons. [Explanation to section 206C]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.96 INCOME TAX LAW

# (3) Higher rate of TCS for non-furnishers of PAN [Section 206CC]

(i) The provisions of section 206CC require tax collection at the higher of the following two rates, in case of failure by the person paying any sum or amount on which tax is collectible at source (collectee) to furnish PAN [PAN or Aadhaar number in case of section 206C(1H)] to the person responsible for collecting tax at source (collector) –

- (a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act
- (b) at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s 206C(1H)]

However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%.

(ii) Tax would be collectible at the rates mentioned above also in case where the person furnishes a declaration under section 206C(1A) but does not provide his PAN.

(iii) Both the collectee and the collector have to compulsorily quote the PAN of the collectee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other documents exchanged between them.

(iv) If the PAN provided to the collector is invalid or it does not belong to the collectee, it shall be deemed that the collectee has not furnished his PAN to the collector. Accordingly, tax would be collectible at the rate specified in (i) above.

(v) The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India.

# (4) Higher rate of TCS for non-filers of income-tax return [Section 206CCA]

(i) Section 206CCA requires tax to be collected at source under the provisions of this Chapter on any sum or amount received by a person from a specified person, at higher of the following rates –

- (a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;
- (b) at 5%

However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(ii) In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the specified person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA, then, tax is required to be collected at higher of the two rates provided in section 206CC and section 206CCA.

(iii) Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and tax collected at source in his case is ₹ 50,000 or more in the said previous year.

However, the specified person would not include -

- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India¹⁰; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by the Central Government in this behalf.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 46/2024 dated 27.5.2024, notified the RBI as a person to not include in the definition of specified person.

# CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to section 206C(1F)

These amendments in section 206C have given rise to certain issues relating to the scope and applicability of the provisions. Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Circular No. 22/2016 dated 8.6.2016, clarified the following issues in “Question & Answer (Q&A)” format.

Q.1 Whether TCS@1% is on sale of motor vehicle at retail level or also on sale of motor vehicles by manufacturers to dealers/ distributors?

A. To bring high value transactions within the tax net, section 206C has been amended to provide that the seller shall collect the tax @ 1%

10 “Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.98 INCOME TAX LAW

from the purchaser on sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs. This is brought to cover all transactions of retail sales and accordingly, it will not apply on sale of motor vehicles by manufacturers to dealers/distributors.

# Q.2

Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable only to luxury cars?

# A.

No, as per section 206C(1F), the seller shall collect tax@1% from the purchaser on sale of any motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs.

# Q.3

Whether TCS@1% is applicable in the case of sale to Government Departments, Embassies, Consulates and United Nation Institutions, of motor vehicle or any other goods or provision of services?

# A.

Government, institutions notified under United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1947, and Embassies, Consulates, High Commission, Legation, Commission and trade representation of a foreign State shall not be liable to levy of TCS@1% under section 206C(1F).

# Q.4

Whether TCS is applicable on each sale of motor vehicle or on aggregate value of sale during the year?

# A.

Tax is to be collected at source@1% on sale consideration of a motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs. It is applicable to each sale and not to aggregate value of sale made during the year.

# Q.5

Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable in case of an individual?

# A.

The definition of "Seller" as given in clause (c) of the Explanation below sub-section (11) of section 206C shall be applicable in the case of sale of motor vehicles also.

# Q.6

How would the provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle be applicable in a case where part of the payment is made in cash and part is made by cheque?

# A.

The provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs is not dependent on mode of payment. Any sale of motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs would attract TCS@1%.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.99

# (6) CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to section 206C(1H)

In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the approval of Central Government, vide Circular no. 17/2020 dated 29.9.2020, issued the following guidelines for removing certain difficulties-

1. Applicability on sale of Motor vehicle:
The provisions of section 206C(1F) apply to sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs. Section 206C(1H) excludes from its applicability goods covered under section 206C(1F). It may be noted that the scope of sections 206C(1H) and (1F) are different. While section 206C(1F) is based on single sale of motor vehicle, section 206C(1H) is for receipt above ` 50 lakhs. Hence, in order to remove difficulty that whether all motor vehicles are excluded from the applicability of section 206C(1H), it is clarified that,-

- Receipt of sale consideration from a dealer would be subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H), if such sales are not subjected to TCS under section 206C(1F).
- In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale of motor vehicle of the value of ` 10 lakhs or less to a buyer would be subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H), if the receipt of sale consideration for such vehicles during the previous year exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the previous year.
- In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs would not be subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H) if such sales are subjected to TCS under section 206C(1F).
2. Adjustment for sale return, discount or indirect taxes:
It is been clarified that no adjustment on account of sale return or discount or indirect taxes including GST is required to be made for collection of tax under section 206C(1H) since the collection is made with reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.

Note – It can be inferred that no adjustment for GST is required to be made under section 206C(1F) also, since collection is made with reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.100 INCOME TAX LAW

# ILLUSTRATION 13

Mr. Gupta, a resident Indian, is in retail business and his turnover for F.Y.2023-24 was ` 12 crores. He regularly purchases goods from another resident, Mr. Agarwal, a wholesaler, and the aggregate payments during the F.Y.2024-25 was ` 95 lakh (` 20 lakh on 1.6.2024, ` 25 lakh on 12.8.2024, ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2024 and ` 28 lakh on 25.3.2025). Assume that the said amounts were credited to Mr. Agarwal’s account in the books of Mr. Gupta on the same date. Mr. Agarwal’s turnover for F.Y.2023-24 was ` 15 crores.

1. Based on the above facts, examine the TDS/TCS implications, if any, under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
2. Would your answer be different if Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2023-24 was ` 8 crores, all other facts remaining the same?
3. Would your answer to (1) and (2) change, if PAN has not been furnished by the buyer or seller, as required?

# SOLUTION

1. Since Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2023-24 exceeds 10 crores, and payments made by him to Mr. Agarwal, a resident seller exceed ` 50 lakhs in the P.Y.2024-25, he is liable to deduct tax @0.1% of ` 45 lakhs (being the sum exceeding ` 50 lakhs) in the following manner –
- No tax is to be deducted u/s 194Q on the payments made on 1.6.2024 and 12.8.2024, since the aggregate payments till that date i.e. ` 45 lakhs, has not exceeded the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.
- Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from the payment/credit of ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2024 [` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being the balance unexhausted threshold limit].
- Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from the payment/credit of ` 28 lakhs on 25.3.2025.

Note – In this case, since both section 194Q and 206C(1H) applies, tax has to be deducted u/s 194Q.
2. If Mr. Gupta’s turnover for the F.Y.2023-24 was only ` 8 crores, TDS provisions under section 194Q would not be attracted. However, TCS provisions under section 206C(1H) would be attracted in the hands of Mr. Agarwal, since his turnover exceeds ` 10 crores in the F.Y.2023-24 and his receipts from Mr. Gupta exceed ` 50 lakhs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

No tax is to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on 1.6.2024 and 12.8.2024, since the aggregate receipts till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not exceeded the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.

Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on 23.11.2024 (` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being the balance unexhausted threshold limit).

Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on 25.3.2025.

(3) In case (1), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Agarwal to Mr. Gupta, then, Mr. Gupta has to deduct tax@5%, instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of ` 85,000 (i.e., 5% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 1,40,000 (5% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be deducted by Mr. Gupta u/s 194Q on 23.11.2024 and 25.3.2025, respectively.

In case (2), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Gupta to Mr. Agarwal, then, Mr. Agarwal has to collect tax@1% instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of ` 17,000 (i.e., 1% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 28,000 (1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be collected by Mr. Agarwal u/s 206C(1H) on 23.11.2024 and 25.3.2025, respectively.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.102

the turnover of credit, 0.1% of the value of 50 lakhs from a seller should exceed 10 crore in the F.Y.2023-24 or at the time of receipt exceeding purchases in consideration exceeding 50 lakhs from a buyer.

At the time of receipt, Seller’s turnover should exceed 10 crore in the importing Central Govt, State Govt, embassy, High commission, legation, consulate, other notified persons in India.

# 206C(1H) TCS

Overview - TCS u/s 206C(1)/(1F)/(1H) v. TDS u/s 194Q

of 0.1% F.Y.2023-24 exceed 50 lakh (profession) of sale consideration 1% of sale consideration at the time of receipt.

# 206C(1F) TCS

Local authority, Local firm, Govt., society, Public sector Co., a Buyer in retail sale of consumption.

# 206C(1) TCS

Different rates at the time of debit for different goods (See below).

# Particulars

|Point of time|Buyer (194Q)|Exclusions|Common|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|2.|3.|4.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.103

|206C(1H)|TCS|Nil| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | |50|and value of|10 crore in the| |
| | | |Yes, if turnover of buyer|purchases from seller in|exceeds| |
|194Q|TDS|4| | | | |
|5| |`|2| | | |
|2| | |-|-| | |
| | | |3|4|exceeds| |
| | | |F.Y.202|F.Y.202| | |
|206C(1F)|TCS|N.A.| | | | |
| | | |Nil, by virtue|of section| | |
|206C(1)|2.5%|2.5%| | | | |
| |2.5%| |206C(1A)|TCS 1%| | |
| |5%|1%|1%| | | |
| | |ber obtained by any other|es or things or| | | |
|Minerals, being coal or lignite|Timber obtained under forest| |manufacturing, processing or| | | |
| | |Any other forest produce not|If items (1) to (7) are used for| | | |
|being timber or tendu leaves|Alcoholic liquor for human| |generation of electricity and| | | |
| |consumption|Tendu leaves|or iron ore| | | |
|lease mode| |Scrap| | | | |
| |Tim| | | | | |
|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.104

not and exceeds vehicles sold to dealer required to deduct tax

No, if dealer is required to deduct tax at source.

10 4 motor

to deduct tax at source.

is 202

206C(1H) urnover exceeds crore in the F.Y.

dealer of manufacturer’s

TCS - source

value in F.Y.202 50 lakhs

if Yes, at t and

10 crore in the purchased value of 50

the Yes, if turnover of dealer

from manufacturer in and v exceeds

194Q TDS - motor vehicles

exceeds F.Y.202 F.Y.202

consideration

206C(1F) 1% of sale TCS

206C(1) TCS - dealers/ vehicles sold by the seller to

Sale of Motor Vehicle of value by

aggregate value of all motor

Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 50 lakhs in the

Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 10 lakhs and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

10 lakhs to Goods

not exceeding the buyer ≤

manufacturer distributers exceeding

exceeding F.Y.202
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|to deduct tax at source.|d|to deduct TDS|
|---|---|---|
|required to deduct TDS|No, if buyer is required|10 crore in|
|and seller’s turnover|Yes, if buyer is not|10 crore in the|
|4|2|No, if buyer is req|
|206C(1H)|-|2|
|3|202|-|
|TCS|`|the F.Y.|
|exceeds|uired|`|
|he|Yes, if turnover of buyer|10 crore in t|
|.|4|Yes, if turnover of|
|2|4|2|
|194Q|-|-|
|TDS|3|F.Y.202|
|`|exceeds|206C(1F)|
|TCS|-|-|
|206C(1)|TCS|-|
|Sale of Motor Vehicle of value|50|10 lakhs but|
|50 lakhs in the|aggregate value of all motor|vehicles sold by the seller to|
|sold by the seller to buyer is|If aggregate value of goods|mentioned in 1 to 11|
|Goods|`|not exceeding|
|`|lakhs or less|yer >|
|5|2|-|
|4|F.Y.202|the bu|
|11|12|a|

# 7.106 INCOME TAX LAW

# (7) Furnishing of copy of declaration within specified time [Section 206C(1B)]

The person responsible for collecting tax under this section shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one copy of the declaration referred to in sub-section (1A) on or before 7ᵗʰ of the month next following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.

# (8) TCS to be paid within prescribed time [Section 206C(3)]

Any amount collected under this section shall be paid within the prescribed time to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.

# Time limit for paying tax collected to the credit of the Central Government [Rule 37CA]

|Person collecting sums in accordance with section 206C|Circumstance|Period within which such sum should be paid to the credit of the Central Government|
|---|---|---|
|(1) An office of the Government|(i) where the tax is paid without production of an income-tax challan|on the same day|
| |(ii) where tax is paid on or before 7 days accompanied by an income-tax challan|from the end of the month in which the collection is made|
|(2) Collectors other than an office of the Government| |within one week from the last day of the month in which the collection is made|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.107

# Main differences between TDS and TCS

|TDS|TCS|
|---|---|
|(1) TDS is tax deduction at source|TCS is tax collection at source.|
|(2) Person responsible for paying is required to deduct tax at source at the prescribed rate.|(i) Seller of certain goods is responsible for collecting tax at source at the prescribed rate from the buyer. (ii) Person who grants licence or lease (in respect of any parking lot, toll plaza, mine or quarry) is responsible for collecting tax at source at the prescribed rate from the licensee or lessee, as the case may be. (iii) Authorised dealer receiving amount for remittance under the LRS of the RBI or seller of an overseas tour program package is responsible for collecting tax at source at the prescribed rate from the buyer.|
|(3) Generally, tax is required to be deducted at the time of credit to the account of the payee or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier.|Generally, tax is required to be collected at source at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer of certain goods to the account of the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer, whichever is earlier. However, in case of sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs and sale of goods exceeding ` 50 lakhs other than exported goods and goods mentioned in section 206C(1), tax is required to be collected at source.|

# 7.108 INCOME TAX LAW

collection at source u/s 206C(1F) and 206C(1H), respectively, is required at the time of receipt of sale consideration.

Note – TCS will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.

# (10) Common number for TDS and TCS [Section 203A]

1. Persons responsible for deducting tax or collecting tax at source should apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a “tax-deduction and collection-account number”.
2. Section 203A(2) enlists the documents/certificates/returns/challans in which the “tax deduction account number” or “tax collection account number” or “tax deduction and collection account number” has to be compulsorily quoted.
3. The requirement of obtaining and quoting of TAN under section 203A shall not apply to such person, as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

At the time of credit of the payee's income or at the time of payment whichever is earlier.

|Time of deduction|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
|At the time of payment|10%|Any resident Individual|Any person responsible for paying any income under the head “Salaries”|
|Average|10%|(Employee)|Trustees of the Scheme|

# LET US RECAPITULATE

This is taken care of in computation of exemption for deduction of tax at source.

|Threshold Limit|Basic limit|Rate|
|---|---|---|
|10,000|50,000|7.75%|

Tax deduction at source of payment in Savings Bonds, withdrawal from Provident Fund.

# Section

192, 192A, 193
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.110

|Time of deduction|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
|from Bonds,|Rate or|or|during issued by a Co. in|
|tax in case of interest|tion u/s 193|be|the interest|
|notified Government|of Central|Threshold Limit|for deduction of|
|tax at source|(taxable)|for|also of|
|Bonds, 2018|Government|effect|01.10.2024|
|any other|included such|10,000|the|
|Floating Savings|2020|State|deducpayabl|
|which|the`|on|are|
|ure of|payment|Nat|Section|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.111

Payment by any mode such as any before any or at the time of deduction of payment of dividend. Payment, earlier. At the time of credit of the payee is respect of distribution to whichever.

# Rate of TDS

|Payee|Rate of TDS|
|---|---|
|Shareholder Resident|10%|
|Any Resident|10%|

# Payer

Principal company of domestic officer whose total gross sales, receipts from an individual or HUF by an A/c resident individual interested, paid or credited to.

# Threshold Limit

No threshold in case of interest or > F.Y., in case of interest.

|Amount|Mode|Aggregate Amount|
|---|---|---|
|5,000|Cheque|No|
|40,000|Cash|Other cases|

# Nature of Payment

Dividend (including preference shares) Interest on securities other than.

# Section

194A
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.112

# Time of deduction

# Rate of TDS

# Payee

|profession during the|or|in case of|paying interest other|
|---|---|---|---|
|F.Y.)|in|for|on|
|not|crore|business|Payer|
|do|immediately|50 lakhs|responsible|
|profession|preceding|business of|exceed|
|case| |operative| |
|engaged office|paid|notified tax|deduction limit is|
|banking|banking|deposit|abovesenior|
|5,000 in a F.Y.,|for deduction of|tax at source|business; and|
|in other cases.|Threshold Limit| | |
|or|company;|post|a|
|-|a|co|society|
|by|(i)|in| |
|payment|Nat|Section| |

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Time of deduction|At the time of payment|At the end of the F.Y.|
|---|---|---|
|Rate of TDS|30%|30%|
|Payee|Any Person|Any person|
|Payer|responsible|responsible|
|Threshold Limit|10,000 in a F.Y.|or aggregate|

Winnings from game or other lottery, puzzle or card game, any form or nature of online games or gambling.

Section 194B 194BA
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.114

At the time of credit of the payment, or at the time of payment whichever is earlier.

Time of deduction prescribed manner at the end of the F.Y. to sum computed of contractor account such time sum credited, if the paid payee is Individual or other person.

|Rate of TDS|30%|1%|2%|
|---|---|---|---|
|Payee|Any Person|Resident|HUF|
|Work|contractor (including labour)|Any society, foreign Govt. of Foreign State|Govt., Central/State/|
|horse|betting|for in any race course.| |
|Payer|Maker|for arranging wagering| |
|licence|person|Book racing|Local|
|credited or paid > tax where sum is|sum|during|paid|

for deduction of Threshold Limit 10,000 in a F.Y. or aggregate credited to F.Y. not credited to contractor.

Amount single sums need The paid Indi

# Winnings from horse race

Contractors Payments

Section
194BB
194C
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Time of deduction|At the time of credit of the income|At the time of payment|
|---|---|---|
|Rate of TDS|5% if payee is a resident corporate|10% if payee is a non-resident|
|Payee|Any Resident individual/ HUF from receipts exceeding 1 crore in case of profession|Any resident person for paying any income|
|Payer|Any person responsible for procuring business|Any way responsible for soliciting business|
|Threshold Limit|15,000 in a F.Y.|1,00,000 aggregate amount in a financial year|
|Amount|sum ≥ not|Life Insurance Commission|
|Section|194D|194DA|

# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.116

At the time of credit of the time of credit of the payee is whichever to the time of the income of the payment, account earlier. Such at or rate of tax is 30.09.2024. Thereafter 2%. 5%.

W.e.f. 1.10.2024, thereinafter till 2%. 5%.

|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|
|30.09.2024|Any resident distributing, purchasing, stocking, selling lottery tickets|Any person responsible for payment of commission, remuneration or prize|
|Threshold Limit|15,000|15,000|

the sum allocated by paying any income by way of bonus on whatever do not exceed 1 crore in case of business receipts in case of an Individual or HUF.

for deduction of tax at source in financial year.

Commission or brokerage on sale of lottery tickets fulfilling conditions specified u/s 10(10D) on Section 194G 194H.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Time of deduction|Rate of TDS|Payee|Payer|Threshold Limit|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|At the time of credit of the sum to the payee's account|For P & M or equipment - 10%|Any resident|Any HUF or business person|2,40,000|
|At the time of credit of the sum to the payee's account|For transfer of land, building, furniture - 2%|Resident from profession during the financial year|Responsible for deduction of tax at source|50|
|Time of deduction|1%|Transferor|Responsible person paying rent| |
|Threshold Limit|1 crore in case of receipts|Transferee (other than individual)| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.118

payment, payment, of the previous year or rent, for the last month year, as the case may be. At the time of credit of the tenancy, if the property is vacated, whichever is earlier.

Time of deduction at the time of the account whichever is earlier during the month or the payee of the transferor last time he is to be, the duty is.

Rate of TDS 30.09.2024. Thereafter 5% higher till 2%.

Any Resident paying compensation for compulsory acquisition of property HUF whose turnover exceeds 50 lakhs in case of Individual/HUF whose profession carried on during the F.Y.)

Section 194LA rural land) case.

Payer responsible for deduction of tax at source for stamp value 50,000 for a month or part of a month.

Threshold Limit for deduction of tax at source for stamp value.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Time of deduction|Payee|Rate of TDS|Threshold Limit|
|---|---|---|---|
|At the time of credit of the sum to the payee's account or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier.|Any Resident other than an individual or HUF|2% for technical services, 10% for royalty|30,000 in case of professional fees|
|In case of professional services, the limit does not apply to payment made to a director of a company.|HUF|2% of gross receipts|50 lakhs|
|However, for deduction of tax at source in this category, the threshold limit is applicable.|Individual|1 crore in case of professional fees| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.120

|At the time of credit of|At the time of credit of| |
|---|---|---|
|the|the| |
|Time of deduction|payee is|At the time of payment|
|whichever|to the time|at|
|sum|the| |
|of|payment,| |
|such|at| |
| |or| |
|Rate of TDS|30.09.2024.|till|
|10%|10%|5%|
|Payee|dent|Any Resident|
|Any resi|specified|other than those who|
|fund/Administrator of|paying any income in|respect of units of a|
|person|for|his|
|personal purposes.|for| |
|specified company|immovable property| |
|Payer|responsible|compensation|
|exclusively|any|compulsory|
|undertaking/|responsible|acquisition|
| |enhanced|Individual|
|Any|the| |
|or|5,000|or|
|&gt; 2,50,000 in a F.Y.|50,00,000 in a| |
|Threshold Limit|for deduction of|tax at source|
|&gt; `|aggregate|amount|
|in a F.Y.| | |
|© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India|amou|`|
|&gt;|on other| |
|certain|property other| |
|the of|acquisition|Payments to|
|ure of|capital gains|Contractors|
|in|agricultural|in India|
|Section|I|than|
|194K|194LA|194M|

# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# Payment

At the time of payment

# Time of deduction

whichever is earlier.

# Rate of TDS

Thereafter immediately the g shall ` 2%. case filed amt in cash >

of recipient preceding expired, of the P.Y.

@2% all which139(1) sum not P.Y.s, limit sum agg. lakh

# Payee

Any person deduct tax at source being the amount or amounts, as the case

or who is responsible for society,

# Payer

section 194C a banking company in the operative of cash

1 crore in case the banking institution

required or 194H or 194J

on a post office in

any co operative society

be, exceeding recipient

# Threshold Limit

for deduction of tax at source

is a crore recipient of others

# Commission or brokerage

payment professional withdrawals

# Fees services

Cash

# Section 194N

a
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.122 Time of deduction

|Rate of TDS|Threshold Limit|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
|@2% of the sum where the recipient is a citizen|3,00,000|individual, specified senior|the previous person maintained more than one accounts during the year, for deduction of tax at source|
|@5% of the sum where the recipient is a society| |Notified bank (in specified exemption)| |

where the operative cash withdrawal is 1 crore in case the recipient is 20 lakhs but less than 1 crore.

Basic limit case: interest on pension (along with bank account)

Section 194P
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.123

# Time of deduction

the default tax tax tax of shifting out of in the the the

# Rate of TDS

specified individual regime. option 115BAC, section default

Rates where pays

years or more 75 time in who a is of the is having or any

during the PY; Payee resident being India, age

no

# Payer

default senior citizen pays 5,00,000, as the regime

u/s has u/s deduction if senior fting to underallowable

# Threshold Limit

tax at source be, option of shi effect A, Further,

3,00,000 regime may exercised providing allowable income Chapter basic limit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

the taxtax ` ` tax

# ure of payment

# Nat

# Section
# INCOME TAX LAW

# 7.124

At the time of payment, account of the seller or at the time of credit of the sum whichever is earlier.

# Time of deduction

Rate of TDS 0.1% of sum exceeding 50 lakhs

in which he is to his specified income; and Any resident receiving pension has furnished declaration to bank.

Buyer means a person immediately preceding turnover from business is to for FY theis for sales, purchase of goods.

# Payer

wh any total 10 the of responsible paying exceeds FY purchase during the car

the u/s 87A from tax entitled to rebate is payable, then the Threshold Limit for deduction of tax at source should be given effect to previous year

individual case same

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

# Section 194Q
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

|Time of deduction|Rate of TDS of|Payee|Payer|
|---|---|---|---|
|Before providing such benefit or perquisite|10%|Any resident|Any HUF or individual|
|Value of benefit or perquisite|Threshold Limit for deduction of tax at source in financial year|Aggregate value of benefit or perquisite|Responsible Officer|
|50 lakhs in case of profession during the preceding financial year|20,000|whose gross turnover exceeds 1 crore|means any person responsible for providing|
|the benefit|including Principal|itself|any perquisite.|

Any benefit or perquisite, whether in cash or in kind, would apply to the provisions arising from the exercise of a profession.

Section 194R

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.126 INCOME TAX LAW

# Notes

1. Section 206AA requires furnishing of PAN by the deductee to the deductor, failing which the deductor has to deduct tax at the higher of the following rates, namely, -
1. at the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961; or
2. at the rate or rates in force; or
3. at the rate of 20% and in case of section 194-Q, 5%
2. Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of this Chapter on any sum or income or amount paid, or payable or credited, by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
1. at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provision of the Act;
2. at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
3. at 5%

However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M¹¹ or 194N.
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and tax collected at source in his case is ₹ 50,000 or more in the said previous year.

However, the specified person would not include -
- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India;
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by 11 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

the Central Government in this behalf (RBI has been notified by the Central Government for this purpose).

(3) In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified person, in addition to the provisions of this section, then, tax is required to be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and section 206AB.

(4) The threshold limit given in column (3) of the table is with respect to each payee.

# II Advance Payment of Tax

# Liability for payment of advance tax [Sections 207 & 208]

Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year in respect of the total income (TI) of the assessee which would be chargeable to tax for the A.Y. immediately following that financial year.

Advance tax is payable during a F.Y. in every case where the amount of such tax payable by the assessee during the year is ` 10,000 or more.

However, an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the previous year, who does not have any income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” (PGBP), is not liable to pay advance tax.

# Instalments of advance tax and due dates [Section 211]

Advance tax payment schedule for corporates and non-corporates (other than an assessee computing profits on presumptive basis under section 44AD or section 44ADA) – Four instalments

|Due date of instalment|Amount payable|
|---|---|
|On or before 15ᵗʰ June|Not less than 15% of advance tax liability.|
|On or before 15ᵗʰ September|Not less than 45% of advance tax liability (-) amount paid in earlier instalment.|
|On or before 15ᵗʰ December|Not less than 75% of advance tax liability (-) amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.|
|On or before 15ᵗʰ March|The whole amount of advance tax liability (-) amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.|

# Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)

An eligible assessee, computing profits or gains of business or profession on
# 7.128 INCOME TAX LAW

Presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 44AD(1) or in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall be required to pay advance tax of the whole amount on or before 15th March of the F.Y. However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March shall also be treated as advance tax paid during the F.Y. ending on that day.

# Interest for defaults in payment of advance tax [Section 234B]

1. Interest u/s 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or payment of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.
2. The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from 1st April following the F.Y. up to the date of determination of total income under section 143(1) and where regular assessment is made, up to the date of such regular assessment.
3. Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the assessed tax and the advance tax paid.
4. “Assessed tax” means the tax on total income determined u/s 143(1) less TDS & TCS, any relief of tax allowed u/s 89, any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) shall not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable u/s 140B.
5. Where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee u/s 140A or otherwise, interest shall be calculated up to the date of payment of such tax and reduced by the interest, if any, paid u/s 140A towards the interest chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall be calculated at 1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.

# Interest for deferment of advance tax [Section 234C]

1. Manner of computation of interest u/s 234C for deferment of advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees: In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the dates specified in column (1) below is less than the specified percentage [given in column (2) below] of tax due on returned income, then simple interest shall be applicable.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on the amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable u/s 234C.

|Specified date|Specified %|Shortfall in advance tax|Period|
|---|---|---|---|
|15ᵗʰ June|15%|15% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ June|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ September|45%|45% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ September|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ December|75%|75% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ December|3 months|
|15ᵗʰ March|100%|100% of tax due on returned income (-) advance tax paid up to 15ᵗʰ March|1 month|

Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on those dates.

Tax due on returned income = Tax chargeable on total income declared in the return of income – TDS – TCS - any relief of tax allowed u/s 89 - any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):

In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall from the tax due on the returned income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.130 INCOME TAX LAW

# (3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:

Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on account of under-estimate or failure to estimate –

- (i) the amount of capital gains;
- (ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;
- (iii) income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in cases where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the first time.
- (iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred u/s 2(22)(e).

However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), as the case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year.

# Tax Collection at source [Section 206C]

# (1) Sale of certain goods [Section 206C(1)]

Sellers of certain goods are required to collect tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified percentage for collection of tax at source is as follows:

|Nature of Goods|Percentage|
|---|---|
|(i) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption|1%|
|(ii) Tendu leaves|5%|
|(iii) Timber obtained under a forest lease|2.5%|
|(iv) Timber obtained by any mode other than (iii)|2.5%|
|(v) Any other forest produce not being timber or tendu leaves|2.5%|
|(vi) Scrap|1%|
|(vii) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore|1%|

The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the buyer, whichever is earlier.

However, no collection of tax shall be made in the case of a resident buyer, if such buyer furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate to the effect.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

that goods are to be utilised for the purpose of manufacturing, processing or producing articles or things or for the purposes of generation of power and not for trading purposes [Section 206C(1A)].

# (2) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry [Section 206C(1C)]

Every person who grants a lease or a licence or enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest in any:

- parking lot
- toll plaza
- a mine or a quarry

to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at the rate of 2%, at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the licensee or lessee to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the licensee or lessee, whichever is earlier.

# (3) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs [Section 206C(1F)]

Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer @1% of the sale consideration.

With effect from 01.01.2025, the scope of section 206C(1F) has been expanded to include every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of any other notified goods exceeding ` 10 lakhs, to, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer @1% of the sale consideration.

# (4) Remittance under LRS of RBI or purchase of an overseas tour package [Section 206C(1G)]

Every person,

- being an authorized dealer, who receives amount under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of the RBI for remittance from a buyer, being a person remitting such amount,
- being seller of an overseas tour programme package who receives any amount from the buyer who purchases the package

has to collect tax at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer by any mode, whichever is earlier.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.132 INCOME TAX LAW

# Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of an overseas tour programme package

|S. No.|Amount and purpose of remittance|Rate of TCS|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Where the amount is for purchase of an overseas tour programme package|5% till ` 7 lakhs, 20% thereafter|
|(ii)|(a) Where the amount or aggregate of the amounts being remitted by a buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a financial year|Nil (No tax to be collected at source)|
|(iii)|(a) where the amount is remitted for the purpose of education or medical treatment; and (b) the amount or aggregate of the amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is remitted by the buyer in a financial year|5% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|
|(iv)|(a) where the amount is remitted for the purpose other than mentioned in (iii) above; and (b) the amount or aggregate of the amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is remitted by the buyer in a financial year|20% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|
|(v)|(a) where the amount being remitted out is a loan obtained from any financial institution as defined in section 80E, for the purpose of pursuing any education; and (b) the amount or aggregate of the amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is remitted by the buyer in a financial year|0.5% of the amt or agg. of amts in excess of ` 7 lakh|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# 7.133

# Cases where no tax is to be collected

1. No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of which the sum has been collected by the seller.
2. No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax.
3. No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign State, a local authority or any other person notified by the Central Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions stipulated thereunder. Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated 17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) would not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-resident in terms of section 6 and does not have a permanent establishment in India.

# (5) Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh [Section 206C(1H)]

Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of goods of the value exceeding ` 50 lakhs in a previous year, other than exported goods or goods covered in (a)/(c)/(d), is required to collect tax at source, at the time of receipt of such amount, @0.1% of the sale consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs. However, tax is not required to be collected if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act on the goods purchased by him from the seller and has deducted such tax.

# (6) In case of non-furnishing of PAN

[PAN or Aadhaar number in case of section 206C(1H)] by the collectee to the collector, tax is required to be collected at the higher of –

1. twice the rate specified in the relevant provisions of the Act; or
2. at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s 206C(1H)]. [Section 206CC]

However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%. The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India.

# (7) Section 206CCA

requires tax to be collected at source on any sum or amount received by a person from a specified person, at higher of the following rates –

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.134 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;

(b) at 5%

However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%.

In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the specified person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA, then, tax is required to be collected at higher of the two rates provided in section 206CC and section 206CCA.

# Meaning of “specified person”

A person who has not furnished the return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and tax collected at source in his case is ₹ 50,000 or more in the said previous year.

However, the specified person would not include:

- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by the Central Government in this behalf (RBI has been notified by the Central Government for this purpose).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Ashwin doing manufacture and wholesale trade furnishes you the following information:
|Particulars|2023-24|2024-25|
|---|---|---|
|Total turnover for the financial year -|1,05,00,000|95,00,000|

Examine whether tax deduction at source provisions are attracted for the below said expenses incurred during the financial year 2024-25:
|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Interest paid to UCO Bank on 15.8.2024|41,000|
|Contract payment to Raj (2 contracts of ` 12,000 each) on 12.12.2024|24,000|
|Shop rent paid (one payee) on 21.1.2025|2,50,000|
|Commission paid to Balu on 15.3.2025|7,000|
2. Compute the amount of tax deduction at source on the following payments made by M/s S Ltd. during the financial year 2024-25 as per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
|S. No.|Date|Nature of Payment|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|1-10-2024|Payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. R, a transporter who owns 8 goods carriages throughout the previous year and furnishes a declaration to this effect alongwith his PAN.|
|(ii)|1-11-2024|Payment of fee for technical services of ` 25,000 and Royalty of ` 20,000 to Mr. Shyam who is having PAN.|
|(iii)|30-06-2024|Payment of ` 25,000 to M/s X Ltd. for repair of building.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.136 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) 01-01-2025 Payment of ` 2,00,000 made to Mr. A for purchase of diaries made according to specifications of M/s S Ltd. However, no material was supplied for such diaries to Mr. A by M/s S Ltd or its associates.

(v) 01-01-2025 Payment of ` 2,30,000 made to Mr. Bharat for compulsory acquisition of his house as per law of the State Government.

(vi) 01-02-2025 Payment of commission of ` 14,000 to Mr. Y.

# 3. Examine the applicability of TDS provisions and TDS amount in the following cases:

(a) Rent paid for hire of machinery by B Ltd. to Mr. Raman ` 2,60,000 on 27.9.2024.

(b) Fee paid on 1.12.2024 to Dr. Srivatsan by Sundar (HUF) ` 35,000 for surgery performed on a member of the family.

(c) ABC and Co. Ltd. paid ` 19,000 to one of its Directors as sitting fees on 01-01-2025.

# 4. Examine the applicability of tax deduction at source provisions, the rate and amount of tax deduction in the following cases for the F.Y. 2024-25:

(1) Payment made by a company to Mr. Ram, sub-contractor, ` 3,00,000 with outstanding balance of ` 1,20,000 shown in the books as on 31.3.2025.

(2) Winning from horse race ` 1,50,000 paid to Mr. Shyam, an Indian resident.

(3) ` 2,00,000 paid to Mr. A, a resident individual, on 22-02-2025 by the State of Uttar Pradesh on compulsory acquisition of his urban land.

# 5. Briefly discuss the provisions relating to payment of advance tax on income arising from capital gains and casual income.

# ANSWERS

1. As the turnover of business carried on by Ashwin for F.Y. 2023-24, has exceeded ` 1 crore, he has to comply with the tax deduction provisions during the financial year 2024-25, subject to the exemptions provided for under the relevant sections for applicability of TDS provisions.
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

Interest paid to UCO Bank

TDS under section 194A is not attracted in respect of interest paid to a banking company.

Contract payment of ₹ 24,000 to Raj for 2 contracts of ₹ 12,000 each

TDS provisions under section 194C would not be attracted if the amount paid to a contractor does not exceed ₹ 30,000 in a single payment or ₹ 1,00,000 in the aggregate during the financial year. Therefore, TDS provisions under section 194C are not attracted in this case.

Shop Rent paid to one payee – Tax has to be deducted @10% under section 194-I as the annual rental payment exceeds ₹ 2,40,000.

Commission paid to Balu – No, tax has to be deducted under section 194H in this case as the commission does not exceed ₹ 15,000.

# 2.

(i) No tax is required to be deducted at source under section 194C by M/s S Ltd. on payment to transporter Mr. R, since he satisfies the following conditions:

1. He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the previous year.
2. He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages;
3. He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.

(ii) As per section 194J, liability to deduct tax is attracted only in case the payment made as fees for technical services and royalty, individually, exceeds ₹ 30,000 during the financial year. In the given case, since, the individual payments for fee of technical services i.e., ₹ 25,000 and royalty ₹ 20,000 is less than ₹ 30,000 each, there is no liability to deduct tax at source. It is assumed that no other payment towards fees for technical services and royalty were made during the year to Mr. Shyam.

(iii) Provisions of section 194C are not attracted in this case, since the payment for repair of building on 30.06.2024 to M/s X Ltd. is less than the threshold limit of ₹ 30,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 7.138 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) According to section 194C, the definition of “work” does not include the manufacturing or supply of product according to the specification by customer in case the material is purchased from a person other than the customer or associate of such customer. Therefore, there is no liability to deduct tax at source in respect of payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. A, since the contract is a contract for ‘sale’.

(v) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable property, is responsible for deduction of tax at source if such payment or the aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000. In the given case, no liability to deduct tax at source is attracted as the payment made does not exceed ` 2,50,000.

(vi) As per section 194H, tax is deductible at source if the amount of commission or brokerage or the aggregate of the amounts of commission or brokerage credited or paid during the financial year exceeds ` 15,000. Since the commission payment made to Mr. Y does not exceed ` 15,000, the provisions of section 194H are not attracted.

# 3. (a)

Since the rent paid for hire of machinery by B. Ltd. to Mr. Raman exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions of section 194-I for deduction of tax at source are attracted. The rate applicable for deduction of tax at source under section 194-I on rent paid for hire of plant and machinery is 2%, assuming that Mr. Raman had furnished his permanent account number to B Ltd. Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

= ` 2,60,000 x 2% = ` 5,200.

Note: In case Mr. Raman does not furnish his permanent account number to B Ltd., tax shall be deducted @ 20% on ` 2,60,000, by virtue of provisions of section 206AA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

(b) As per the provisions of section 194J, a Hindu Undivided Family is required to deduct tax at source on fees paid for professional services only if the total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession exceed ` 1 crore in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of profession, as the case may be, in the financial year preceding the current financial year and such payment made for professional services is not exclusively for the personal purpose of any member of Hindu Undivided Family.

Section 194M provides for deduction of tax at source by a HUF (which is not required to deduct tax at source under section 194J) in respect of fees for professional service if such sum or aggregate of such sum exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the financial year.

In the given case, the fees for professional service to Dr. Srivatsan is paid on 1.12.2024 for a personal purpose, therefore, section 194J is not attracted. Section 194M would have been attracted if the payment or aggregate of payments exceeded ` 50 lakhs in the P.Y.2024-25. However, since the payment does not exceed ` 50 lakh in this case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source under section 194M also.

(c) Section 194J provides for deduction of tax at source @10% from any sum paid by way of any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called, to a resident director, which is not in the nature of salary on which tax is deductible under section 192. The threshold limit of ` 30,000 up to which the provisions of tax deduction at source are not attracted in respect of every other payment covered under section 194J is, however, not applicable in respect of sum paid to a director.

Therefore, tax @10% has to be deducted at source under section 194J in respect of the sum of ` 19,000 paid by ABC Ltd. to its director. Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

= ` 19,000 x 10% = ` 1,900

4. (1) Provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C are attracted in respect of payment by a company to a sub-contractor. Under section 194C, tax is deductible at the time of credit or payment, whichever is earlier @1% in case the payment is made to an individual.
# 7.140 INCOME TAX LAW

Since the aggregate amount credited or paid during the year is ` 4,20,000, tax is deductible @1% on ` 4,20,000.

Tax to be deducted = ` 4,20,000 x 1% = ` 4,200

(2) Under section 194BB, tax is to be deducted at source, if the winnings from horse races exceed ` 10,000. The rate of deduction of tax at source is 30%.

Hence, tax to be deducted = ` 1,50,000 x 30% = ` 45,000.

(3) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable property, is required to deduct tax at source, if such payment or the aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000.

In the given case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source as the payment made to Mr. A does not exceed ` 2,50,000.

# 5.

The proviso to section 234C contains the provisions for payment of advance tax in case of capital gains and casual income.

Advance tax is payable by an assessee on his/its total income, which includes capital gains and casual income like income from lotteries, crossword puzzles, etc.

Since it is not possible for the assessee to estimate his capital gains, or income from lotteries etc., it has been provided that if any such income arises after the due date for any instalment, then, the entire amount of the tax payable (after considering tax deducted at source) on such capital gains or casual income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance tax, which are due.

Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31st March of the relevant financial year.

No interest liability on late payment would arise if the entire tax liability is so paid.

Note: In case of casual income the entire tax liability is fully deductible at source @30% under section 194B, 194BA and 194BB. Therefore, advance tax liability would arise only if the surcharge, if any, and health and education cess @4% in respect thereof, along with tax liability in respect of other income, if any, is 10,000 or more.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 8

# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to–

- comprehend as to what is a “return of income”;
- identify the persons who have to compulsorily file a return of income;
- identify and recall the due date for filing return of income for different assessees;
- examine the consequences of late filing of return;
- compute the interest payable for delayed filing of return of income;
- compute the fee payable for delayed filing of return of income;
- appreciate when a return of income can be revised and the time limit within which a return has to be revised;
- appreciate when an updated return of income can be filed;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.2 INCOME TAX LAW

- appreciate the manner of computation of tax payable on the basis of updated return;
- identify the persons who are required to apply for permanent account number;
- identify the transactions in respect of which quoting of PAN is mandatory;
- appreciate who are the specified classes of persons who can file return through Tax Return Preparer;
- identify the persons who are authorised to verify the return of income in the case of different assessees in various circumstances;
- appreciate the requirement to pay self-assessment tax before filing return of income;
- appreciate the order of adjustment of amount paid by the assessee against self-assessment tax, fee and interest.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

|Filing of Return|Interest and fee for default in furnishing return of income|Other Provisions|
|---|---|---|
|Compulsory filing of Return of Income|Interest for default in furnishing return of income [Section 234A]|Permanent Account Number [Section 139A]|
|Return of Loss [Section 139(3)]|Fee for non intimation of Aadhaar Number [Section 234H]|Quoting of Aadhaar Number [Section 139AA]|
|Belated Return [Section 139(4)]|Submission of returns through Tax Return Preparers [Section 139B]|Person authorised to verify return of income [Section 140]|
|Revised Return [Section 139(5)]|Fee for default in furnishing return of income [Section 234F]|Self-Assessment [Section 140A]|
|Updated Return [Section 139(8A)]|Tax on updated return [Section 140B]| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.4 INCOME TAX LAW

# 1. RETURN OF INCOME

The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains provisions for filing of return of income. Return of income is the format in which the assessee furnishes information, as self-declaration, regarding his total income and tax payable. The format for filing of returns by different assessees is notified by the CBDT. The particulars of income earned under different heads, gross total income, deductions from gross total income, total income and tax payable by the assessee are generally required to be furnished in a return of income. In short, a return of income is the declaration of income and the resultant tax by the assessee in the prescribed format.

# 2. COMPULSORY FILING OF RETURN OF INCOME

# [SECTION 139(1)]

1. As per section 139(1), it is compulsory for companies and firms to file a return of income or loss for every previous year on or before the due date in the prescribed form.
2. In case of a person other than a company or a firm, filing of return of income on or before the due date is mandatory, if his total income or the total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this Act during the previous year exceeds the basic exemption limit.
3. Every person, being a resident other than not ordinarily resident in India within the meaning of section 6(6), who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1), would be required to file a return of income or loss for the previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner on or before the due date, if such person, at any time during the previous year, -
1. holds, as a beneficial owner or otherwise, any asset (including any financial interest in any entity) located outside India or has a signing authority in any account located outside India; or
2. is a beneficiary of any asset (including any financial interest in any entity) located outside India.

However, an individual being a beneficiary of any asset (including any financial interest in any entity) located outside India would not be required to file return of income under this clause, where, income, if
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

any, arising from such asset is includible in the income of the person referred to in (a) above in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

# Meaning of “beneficial owner” and “beneficiary” in respect of an asset for the purpose of section 139:

|Beneficial Owner|An individual who has provided, directly or indirectly, consideration for the asset for the immediate or future benefit, direct or indirect, of himself or any other person|
|---|---|
|Beneficiary|An individual who derives benefit from the asset during the previous year and the consideration for such asset has been provided by any person, other than such beneficiary.|

# Requirement of filing of return of income as per the fourth and fifth proviso to section 139(1)

A resident other than not ordinarily resident within the meaning of section 6(6) who is not required to furnish a return of income u/s 139(1) AND who at any time during the P.Y.

|A|OR|B|
|---|---|---|
|holds, as beneficial owner or otherwise, any asset (including financial interest in any entity) located outside India| |has a signing authority in any account located outside India|
| | |is a beneficiary of any asset (including financial interest in any entity) located outside India|

However, where any income arising from such asset is includible in the hands of the person specified in (A) in accordance with the provisions of the Act, an individual, being a beneficiary of such asset, is not required to file return of income under the fourth proviso.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.6 INCOME TAX LAW

(4) Further, every person, being an individual or a HUF or an AOP/BOI, whether incorporated or not, or an artificial juridical person -

- whose total income or the total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this Act during the previous year
- without giving effect to the provisions of Chapter VI-A or section 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F¹
- exceeded the basic exemption limit

is required to file a return of his income or income of such other person on or before the due date in the prescribed form and manner and setting forth the prescribed particulars.

The basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 for individuals/HUF/AOPs/BOIs and artificial juridical persons under default tax regime under section 115BAC. This amount denotes the level of total income, which is arrived at after claiming the admissible deductions under Chapter VI-A i.e., 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and 80JJAA under default tax regime and exemption under section 54/54B/54D/54EC or 54F in respect of capital gain. However, the level of total income to be considered for the purpose of filing return of income is the income before claiming the admissible deductions under Chapter VI-A and exemption under section 54/54B/54D/54EC or 54F.

However, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), the basic exemption limit would be ` 2,50,000 for individuals/HUF/AOPs/BOIs and artificial juridical persons, ` 3,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 60 years but less than 80 years and ` 5,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year. Also, the assessee would be eligible for other deductions under Chapter VI-A subject to fulfilling the stipulated conditions.

(5) Any person other than a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1), is required to file income-tax return in the prescribed form and manner on or before the due date if, during the previous year, such person –

1 or 54G or 54GA. (These sections will be dealt with in detail at the Final level)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

(a) has deposited an amount or aggregate of the amounts exceeding ` 1 crore in one or more current accounts maintained with a banking company or a co-operative bank; or

(b) has incurred expenditure of an amount or aggregate of the amounts exceeding ` 2 lakh for himself or any other person for travel to a foreign country; or

(c) has incurred expenditure of an amount or aggregate of the amounts exceeding ` 1 lakh towards consumption of electricity; or

(d) fulfils such other prescribed conditions.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 37/2022 dated 21.4.2022, inserted Rule 12AB to provide that a person, other than a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1), and who fulfils any of the following conditions during the previous year has to file their return of income on or before the due date in the prescribed form and manner -

(i) if his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business > ` 60 lakhs during the previous year; or

(ii) if his total gross receipts in profession > ` 10 lakhs during the previous year; or

(iii) if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year, in the case of the person, is ` 25,000 or more; or

However, a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or more, at any time during the relevant previous year would be required to file return of income only, if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year, in his case, is ` 50,000 or more

(iv) the deposit in one or more savings bank account of the person, in aggregate, is ` 50 lakhs or more during the previous year.

(6) All such persons mentioned in (1) to (5) above should, on or before the due date, furnish a return of his income or the income of such other person during the previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.8 INCOME TAX LAW

Meaning of due date:

‘Due date’ means -

1. 31st October of the assessment year, where the assessee, other than an assessee referred to in (ii) below, is -
2. - (a) a company,
- (b) a person (other than a company) whose accounts are required to be audited under the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law for the time being in force; or
- (c) a partner of a firm whose accounts are required to be audited under the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law for the time being in force2.

30th November of the assessment year, in the case of an assessee including the partners of the firm2 being such assessee who is required to furnish a report referred to in section 92E.
3. 31st July of the assessment year, in the case of any other assessee.

Note – Section 92E is not covered within the scope of syllabus of Intermediate Paper 4A: Income-tax Law. Section 139(1) provides an extended due date, i.e., 30th November of the assessment year, for assessees who have to file a transfer pricing report i.e., accountant’s report u/s 92E (i.e. assessees who have undertaken international transactions with associated enterprises). Therefore, reference has been made to this section, i.e. section 92E, for explaining this provision in section 139(1).

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Paras aged 55 years is a resident of India. During the F.Y. 2024-25, interest of ` 2,88,000 was credited to his Non-resident (External) Account with SBI. ` 30,000, being interest on fixed deposit with SBI, was credited to his saving bank account during this period. He also earned ` 3,000 as interest on this saving account. Is Paras required to file return of income?

What will be your answer, if he has incurred ` 3 lakhs as travel expenditure of self and spouse to US to stay with his married daughter for some time?

2 or the spouse of such partner if the provisions of section 5A applies to such spouse

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# SOLUTION

An individual is required to furnish a return of income under section 139(1) if his total income, before giving effect to the deductions under Chapter VI-A or exemption under section or section 54/54B/54D/54EC or 54F, exceeds the maximum amount not chargeable to tax i.e. ` 3,00,000 under default tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) and ` 2,50,000 if exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) (for A.Y. 2025-26).

# Computation of total income of Mr. Paras for A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from other sources| |
|Interest earned from Non-resident (External) Account|2,88,000|
|[Exempt under section 10(4)(ii), assuming that Mr. Paras has been permitted by RBI to maintain the aforesaid account]|NIL|
|Interest on fixed deposit with SBI|30,000|
|Interest on savings bank account|3,000|
|Gross Total Income|33,000|
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A (not available under the default tax regime under section 115BAC)|-|
|Total Income|33,000|

In case he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for deduction of ` 3,000 under section 80TTA. Accordingly, his total income would be ` 30,000. However, in both regimes, total income of ` 33,000, before giving effect to deductions under Chapter VI-A, would be considered.

Since the total income of Mr. Paras for A.Y.2025-26, before giving effect to the deductions under Chapter VI-A, is less than the basic exemption limit in both regimes, he is not required to file return of income for A.Y.2025-26.

Note: In the above solution, interest of ` 2,88,000 earned from Non-resident (External) account has been taken as exempt on the assumption that Mr. Paras, a resident, has been permitted by RBI to maintain the aforesaid account. However, in case he has not been so permitted, the said interest would be taxable. In such a case, his total income, before giving effect to, inter alia, the deductions under.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.10 INCOME TAX LAW

Chapter VI-A, would be ` 3,21,000 (` 30,000 + ` 2,88,000 + ` 3,000), which is higher than the basic exemption limit of ` 3,00,000 or ` 2,50,000, as the case may be. Consequently, he would be required to file return of income for A.Y.2025-26.

If he has incurred expenditure of ` 3 lakhs on foreign travel of self and spouse, he has to mandatorily file his return of income on or before the due date under section 139(1), even if his income is less than the basic exemption limit.

# 3. SPECIFIED CLASS OR CLASSES OF PERSONS TO BE EXEMPTED FROM FILING RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 139(1C)]

(1) Every person who falls within the ambit of the conditions mentioned under section 139 has to furnish a return of his income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1).

(2) For reducing the compliance burden of small taxpayers, the Central Government has been empowered to notify the class or classes of persons who will be exempted from the requirement of filing of return of income, subject to satisfying the prescribed conditions.

# 4. RETURN OF LOSS [SECTION 139(3)]

(1) This section requires the assessee to file a return of loss in the same manner as in the case of return of income within the time allowed u/s 139(1).

(2) Section 80 requires mandatory filing of return of loss u/s 139(3) on or before the due date specified u/s 139(1) for carry forward of the following losses -

- (a) Business loss u/s 72(1)
- (b) Speculation business loss u/s 73(2)
- (c) Loss from specified business u/s 73A(2) [In case assesse has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
- (d) Loss under the head “Capital Gains” u/s 74(1)
- (e) Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses u/s 74A(3)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

(3) Consequently, section 139(3) requires filing of return of loss mandatorily within the time allowed u/s 139(1) for claiming carry forward of losses mentioned in (2) above.

(4) However, loss under the head “Income from house property” u/s 71B and unabsorbed depreciation u/s 32 can be carried forward for set-off even though return of loss has not been filed before the due date.

(5) A return of loss has to be filed by the assessee in his own interest and the non-receipt of a notice from the Assessing Officer requiring him to file the return cannot be a valid excuse under any circumstances for the non-filing of such return.

# 5. BELATED RETURN [SECTION 139(4)]

Any person who has not furnished a return within the time allowed to him under section 139(1) may furnish the return for any previous year at any time -

- (i) before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
- (ii) before the completion of the assessment,

whichever is earlier. Hence, belated return cannot be filed after 31ˢᵗ December of the relevant assessment year.

# 6. REVISED RETURN [SECTION 139(5)]

If any person having furnished a return under section 139(1) or a belated return under section 139(4), discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he may furnish a revised return at any time –

- (i) before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
- (ii) before completion of assessment,

whichever is earlier. Hence, belated return cannot be filed after 31ˢᵗ December of the relevant assessment year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.12 INCOME TAX LAW

# QUICK RECAP

# Mandatory filing of return of income [Section 139(1)]

|Person being|Resident|Individual, HUF, AOPs or BOIs|Person who during the P.Y. -|Persons who during the P.Y. -|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|other than RNOR, having|any asset located|Company outside India|or signing authority in any account|located outside India|
|or is beneficiary of|any asset located|outside India| | |

|Person who during the P.Y. -|has deposited > ` 1 crore in one or more current accounts with bank or a co-operative bank; or|
|---|---|
| |has incurred exp. of > ` 2 lakh for himself or any other person for travel to a foreign country; or|
| |has incurred exp of > ` 1 lakh towards electricity consumption;|
| |has total sales, turnover or gross receipts in the business > ` 60 lakhs|
| |has total gross receipts in profession > ` 10 lakhs|
| |has aggregate TDS and TCS credit ≥ ` 25,000 (` 50,000 in case of senior citizen)|
| |has deposit in one or more savings bank account ≥ ` 50 lakhs|

# Due date of filing of return

|30th November of A.Y|31st October of A.Y.|31ˢᵗ July of A.Y.|
|---|---|---|
|• assessee, including partner of the firm, being such assessee who is required to furnish a report referred to in section 92E.|• Company|• Person other than company, whose accounts are required to be audited|
| |• A partner of a firm, whose accounts are required to be audited|• Any other assessee|

# Loss Return under section 139(3)

To be filed on or before the due date under section 139(1) for carry forward of

Business loss u/s 72(1)
Loss from speculation business u/s 73(2)
Loss from specified business u/s 73A(2)
Loss under the head "Capital Gains" u/s 74(1)
Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses u/s 74A(3)
# Belated Return under section 139(4)

If return not filed within the time specified u/s 139(1), the assessee can file belated return u/s 139(4), at any time before

Three months prior to the end of the Relevant Assessment Year OR Completion of the Assessment

Whichever is earlier

# Revised Return under Section 139(5)

Return filed u/s 139(1) or u/s 139(4) can be revised u/s 139(5), if any omission or any wrong statement is discovered by the assessee, at any time before

Three months prior to the end of the Relevant Assessment Year OR Completion of the Assessment

Whichever is earlier

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Explain with brief reasons whether the return of income can be revised under section 139(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following cases:

1. Belated return filed under section 139(4).
2. Return already revised once under section 139(5).
3. Return of loss filed under section 139(3).

# SOLUTION

Any person who has furnished a return under section 139(1) or 139(4) can file a revised return at any time before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year or before the completion of assessment, whichever is earlier, if he discovers any omission or any wrong statement in the return filed earlier. Accordingly,

1. A belated return filed under section 139(4) can be revised.
2. A return revised earlier can be revised again as the first revised return replaces the original return. Therefore, if the assessee discovers any omission or wrong statement in such a revised return, he can furnish a second revised return within the prescribed time i.e. at any time before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year or before the completion of assessment, whichever is earlier. It implies that a return of income can be revised more than once within the prescribed time.
3. A return of loss filed under section 139(3) is deemed to be return filed under section 139(1), and therefore, can be revised under section 139(5).

# INTEREST FOR DEFAULT IN FURNISHING RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 234A]

(1) Interest under section 234A is attracted for failure to file a return of income on or before the due date under section 139(1) i.e., interest is payable where an assessee furnishes the return of income after the due date or does not furnish the return of income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.14 INCOME TAX LAW

1. Simple interest @1% per month or part of the month is payable for the period commencing from the date immediately following the due date and ending on the following dates -
|Circumstances|Ending on the following dates|
|---|---|
|Where the return is furnished after due date|the date of furnishing of the return|
|Where no return is furnished|the date of completion of assessment|
2. The interest has to be calculated on the amount of tax on total income as determined under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, on the amount of the tax on the total income determined under regular assessment, as reduced by the advance tax paid and any tax deducted or collected at source, any relief of tax allowed under section 89 and any tax credit allowed to be set-off in accordance with section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
3. No interest under section 234A shall be charged on self-assessment tax paid by the assessee on or before the due date of filing of return.
4. The interest payable under section 234A shall be reduced by the interest, if any, paid on self-assessment under section 140A towards interest chargeable under section 234A.
5. Tax on total income as determined under section 143(1) would not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143.
6. Tax on total income determined under regular assessment would not include the additional income-tax payable under section 140B.

Note – Section 143(1) provides that if any sum is found due on the basis of a return of income after adjustment of advance tax, relief of tax allowed under section 89, tax deducted at source, tax collection at source and self-assessment tax, an intimation would be sent to the assessee and such intimation is deemed to be a notice of demand issued under section 156. If any refund is due on the basis of the return, it shall be granted to the assessee and intimation to this effect would be sent to the assessee. Where no tax or refund is due, the acknowledgement of the return is deemed to be intimation under section 156.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 8. SELF-ASSESSMENT [SECTION 140A]

(1) Payment of tax, interest and fee before furnishing return of income [Section 140A(1)]

Where any tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be furnished under, inter alia, section 139, after taking into account -

- (i) the amount of tax, already paid, under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961
- (ii) the tax deducted or collected at source
- (iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89
- (iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and
- (v) any tax or interest payable as per the provisions of section 191(2),

the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax before furnishing the return. The return has to be accompanied by the proof of payment of such tax, interest and fee.

(2) Order of adjustment of amount paid by the assessee

Where the amount paid by the assessee under section 140A(1) falls short of the aggregate of the tax, interest and fee as aforesaid, the amount so paid shall first be adjusted towards the fee payable and thereafter towards interest and the balance, if any, shall be adjusted towards the tax payable.

(3) Interest under section 234A [Section 140A(1A)]

For the above purpose, interest payable under section 234A shall be computed on the amount of tax on the total income as declared in the return, as reduced by the amount of -

- (i) advance tax paid, if any;
- (ii) any tax deducted or collected at source;
- (iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.16 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) any tax credit claimed to be set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (4) Interest under section 234B [Section 140A(1B)]

Interest payable under section 234B shall be computed on the assessed tax or on the amount by which the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.

For this purpose “assessed tax” means the tax on total income declared in the return as reduced by the amount of

- tax deducted or collected at source on any income which forms part of the total income;
- any relief of tax claimed under section 89
- any tax credit claimed to be set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (5) Consequence of failure to pay tax, interest or fee [Section 140A(3)]

If any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of such of tax or interest or fee, he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such tax or interest or fee remaining unpaid and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.

# 9. UPDATED RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 139(8A)]

# (1) Option to furnish updated return

Any person may furnish an updated return of his income or the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable, for the previous year relevant to the assessment year at any time within 24 months from the end of the relevant assessment year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

This is irrespective of whether or not he has furnished a return under section 139(1) or belated return under section 139(4) or revised return under section 139(5) for that assessment year. For example, an updated return for A.Y. 2024-25 can be filed till 31.3.2027.

# (2) Non applicability of the provisions of updated return

The provisions of updated return would not apply, if the updated return of such person for that assessment year –

- (i) is a loss return; or
- (ii) has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability determined on the basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5); or
- (iii) results in refund or increases the refund due on the basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5).

# (3) Updated return can be filed if original return is a loss return and updated return is a return of income

If any person has a loss in any previous year and has furnished a return of loss on or before the due date of filing return of income under section 139(1), he shall be allowed to furnish an updated return if such updated return is a return of income. For example if Mr. X has furnished his return of loss for A.Y. 2024-25 on 31.5.2024 consisting of ` 5,00,000 as business loss, he can furnish an updated return for A.Y. 2024-25 upto 31.3.2027 if such updated return is a return of income.

# (4) Updated return to be furnished for subsequent previous year in case (3) above

If the loss or any part thereof carried forward under Chapter VI or unabsorbed depreciation carried forward under section 32(2) or tax credit carried forward under section 115JD is to be reduced for any subsequent previous year as a result of furnishing of updated return of income for a previous year, an updated return is required to be furnished for each such subsequent previous year [In case assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)].

# (5) Circumstances in which updated return cannot be furnished

No updated return shall be furnished in the following scenarios –
# 8.18 INCOME TAX LAW

|S.No.|Scenarios|Updated return cannot be furnished|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|Where a person has furnished an updated return under this sub-section for the relevant assessment year.| |
|(ii)|Where any proceeding for assessment, reassessment, recomputation, or revision of income is pending or has been completed for the relevant assessment year in his case.| |

(6) Updated return for the relevant assessment year cannot be furnished by such person or belongs to such class of persons, as may be notified by the Board in this regard.

Note - There are other circumstances also in which updated return cannot be furnished for the relevant assessment year. For example, where prosecution proceedings are initiated under the relevant provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961. Those circumstances will be dealt with at Final level.

# 10. TAX ON UPDATED RETURN [SECTION 140B]

(1) Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before furnishing updated return of income

(a) In a case where no return is furnished earlier [Section 140B(1)]

(I) Tax to be paid along with interest and fee before furnishing of updating return:

Where no return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional tax computed under section 140B(3), before furnishing the return.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 8.19

The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional income-tax, interest and fee.

# (II) Manner of computation of tax payable on the basis of updated return

The tax payable is to be computed after taking into account the following -

- (i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid, as advance tax;
- (ii) the tax deducted or collected at source;
- (iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89; and
- (iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

# (III) Interest under section 234A if no earlier return has been furnished

In a case, where no earlier return has been furnished, the interest payable under section 234A has to be computed on the amount of the tax on the total income as declared in the updated return under section 139(8A), in accordance with the provisions of section 140A(1A).

# (b) In a case where return is furnished earlier [Section 140B(2)]

# (I) Tax to be paid along with interest before furnishing updated return:

Where, return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) or 139(5) has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest payable under any provision of this Act for any default or delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional tax computed under section 140B(3) (as reduced by the amount of interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier return) before furnishing the return.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.20 INCOME TAX LAW

The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional income-tax and interest.

# (II) Manner of computation of tax payable on the basis of updated return:

The tax payable has to be computed after taking into account the following -

1. the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the credit for which has been taken in the earlier return;
2. the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection and which has not been included in the earlier return;
3. any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in the earlier return, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and

the aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier return.

# (III) Interest under section 234B where earlier return has been furnished [Section 140B(4)]

In a case where an earlier return has been furnished, interest payable under section 234B has to be computed on the assessed tax. “Assessed tax” means the tax on the total income as declared in the updated return to be furnished under section 139(8A), after taking into account the following:

1. the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the credit for which has been taken in the earlier return, if any;
2. the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection and which is taken into account in
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

computing total income and which has not been included in the earlier return;

(iii) any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in the earlier return, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and the aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier return.

(IV) Interest under section 234C if earlier return has been furnished Interest payable under section 234C, where an earlier return has been furnished, has to be computed after taking into account the total income furnished in the updated return as returned income.

# Additional income-tax payable at the time of updated return [Section 140B(3)]

The additional income-tax payable at the time of furnishing the updated return under section 139(8A) would be –

|S.No.|Time of furnishing updated return|Additional Income-tax Payable|
|---|---|---|
|(i)|If such return is furnished after expiry of the time available under section 139(4) or 139(5) of the assessment year and before completion of the period of 12 months from the end of the relevant assessment year;|25% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in (1) above|
|(ii)|If such return is furnished after the expiry of 12 months from the end of the relevant assessment year but before completion of the period of 24 months from the end of the relevant assessment year.|50% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in (1) above|

Computation of Additional income-tax

For the purpose of computation of Additional income-tax”

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.22 INCOME TAX LAW

- Tax would include surcharge and cess, by whatever name called, on such tax.
- The interest payable would be interest chargeable under any provision of the Act, on the income as per updated return furnished under section 139(8A), as reduced by interest paid in the earlier return, if any. However, the interest paid in the earlier return would be considered to be nil, if no earlier return has been furnished.

Note - An updated return furnished under section 139(8A) would be regarded as defective return as referred u/s 139(9) unless such return of income is accompanied by the proof of payment of tax as required under section 140B.

# (3) Power to CBDT to issue guidelines

In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty, with the approval of the Central Government. Every guideline issued shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

# 11. DEFECTIVE RETURN [SECTION 139(9)]

1. Under this section, the Assessing Officer has the power to call upon the assessee to rectify a defective return.
2. Where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income furnished by the assessee is defective, he may intimate the defect to the assessee and give him an opportunity to rectify the defect within 15 days from the date of intimation. The Assessing Officer has the discretion to extend the time period beyond 15 days, on an application made by the assessee in this behalf. The period of 15 days will have to be reckoned from the date on which the communication is served upon the assessee.
3. If the defect is not rectified within the period of 15 days or such further extended period, the return would be treated as an invalid return. The consequential effect would be the same as if the assessee had failed to furnish the return.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

(4) Where, however, the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of 15 days or the further extended period, but before the assessment is made, the Assessing Officer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid return.

(5) A return of income would be regarded as defective unless the annexures, statements and columns therein relating to computation of income chargeable under each head of income, gross total income and total income have been duly filled in.

(6) A return of income u/s 139 would also be regarded as defective if it is not accompanied by proof of payment of taxes, whether by way of advance tax or self-assessment tax.

# FEE FOR DEFAULT IN FURNISHING RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 234F]

Where a person, who is required to furnish a return of income under section 139, fails to do so within the prescribed time limit under section 139(1), he shall pay, by way of fee, a sum of ` 5,000. However, if the total income of the person does not exceed ` 5 lakhs, the fees payable shall not exceed ` 1,000.

# PERMANENT ACCOUNT NUMBER (PAN) [SECTION 139A]

(1) Sub-section (1) requires the following persons mentioned in column (2), who have not been allotted a permanent account number (PAN), to apply to the Assessing Officer within the time specified in column (3) for the allotment of a PAN –

|(1)|(2)|(3)|
|---|---|---|
| |Persons required to apply for PAN|Time limit for making such application (Rule 114)|
|(i)|Every person, if his total income or the total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under the Act during any previous year exceeds|On or before 31st May of the assessment year for which such income is assessable|

# 8.24 INCOME TAX LAW

the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax

1. Every person carrying on any business or profession whose total sales, turnover or gross receipts are or is likely to exceed ` 5 lakhs in any previous year.
2. Every person being a resident, other than an individual, which enters into a financial transaction of an amount aggregating to ` 2,50,000 or more in a financial year on or before 31ˢᵗ May of the immediately following financial year.
3. Every person who is a managing director, director, partner, trustee, author, founder, karta, chief executive officer, principal officer or office bearer of any person referred in (iii) above or any person competent to act on behalf of such person referred in (iii) above on or before 31ˢᵗ May of the immediately following financial year in which the person referred in (iii) enters into financial transaction specified therein.

Further, every person who has not been allotted a PAN and intends to enter into such transaction as prescribed by the CBDT is also required to apply for PAN to the Assessing Officer. Accordingly, Rule 114BA has been inserted to prescribe the following transactions:

|Person required to apply for PAN [Rule 114BA]|Time limit for making application for PAN [Rule 114]|
|---|---|
|Every person, who intends to deposit cash in his one or more accounts with a banking company, co-operative bank or post office, if the cash deposit or the aggregate amount of cash deposit in such accounts during a financial year is ` 20 lakh or more.|At least 7 days before the date on which he intends to deposit cash over the specified limit, i.e., ` 20 lakh or more.|
|Every person, who intends to withdraw cash from his one or more accounts with a banking|At least 7 days before the date on which he intends to withdraw|

# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

company, co-operative bank or post office, if the cash withdrawal or the aggregate amount of cash withdrawal from such accounts during a financial year is ₹ 20 lakh or more.

(iii) Any person, who intends to open a current account or cash credit account with a banking company or a co-operative bank, or a post Office At least 7 days before the date on which he intends to open such account.

However, a person is not required to apply for PAN or quote PAN, in a case –

- (a) where the person, making the deposit or withdrawal of an amount otherwise than by way of cash as per (i) or (ii) above, or opening a current account not being a cash credit account as per (iii) above, is a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign company;
- (b) the transaction is entered into with an IFSC banking unit and
- (c) such non-resident (not being a company) or the foreign company does not have any income chargeable to tax in India.

(2) The Central Government is empowered to specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any class or classes of persons by whom tax is payable under the Act or any tax or duty is payable under any other law for the time being in force. Such persons are required to apply within such time as may be mentioned in that notification to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a PAN [Sub-section (1A)].

(3) For the purpose of collecting any information which may be useful for or relevant to the purposes of the Act, the Central Government may notify any class or classes of persons, and such persons shall within the prescribed time, apply to the Assessing Officer for allotment of a PAN [Sub-section (1B)].

(4) The Assessing Officer, having regard to the nature of transactions as may be prescribed, may also allot a PAN to any other person (whether any tax is payable by him or not) in the manner and in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed [Sub-section (2)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.26 INCOME TAX LAW

(5) Any person, other than the persons mentioned in (1) or (4) above, may apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a PAN and the Assessing Officer shall allot a PAN to such person immediately.

(6) Such PAN comprises of 10 alphanumeric characters.

(7) Quoting of PAN is mandatory in all documents pertaining to the following prescribed transactions [Section 139A(5)]:

- (a) in all returns to, or correspondence with, any income-tax authority;
- (b) in all challans for the payment of any sum due under the Act;
- (c) in all documents pertaining to such transactions entered into by him, as may be prescribed by the CBDT in the interests of revenue. In this connection, CBDT has notified the following transactions vide Rule 114B, namely:

|S. No.|Nature of transaction|Value of transaction|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Sale or purchase of a motor vehicle or vehicle, as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 which requires registration by a registering authority under that Act, other than two wheeled vehicles.|All such transactions|
|2.|Opening an account [other than a time-deposit referred to at Sl. No.12 and a Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account] with a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act).|All such transactions|
|3.|Making an application to any banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act) or to any other company or institution, for issue of a credit or debit card.|All such transactions|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

1. Opening of a demat account with a depository, participant, custodian of securities or any other person registered under section 12(1A) of the SEBI Act, 1992.
2. Payment to a hotel or restaurant against a bill or bills at any one time.

Payment in cash of an amount exceeding ` 50,000.
3. Payment in connection with travel to any foreign country or payment for purchase of any foreign currency at any one time.

Payment in cash of an amount exceeding ` 50,000.
4. Payment to a Mutual Fund for purchase of its units

Amount exceeding ` 50,000.
5. Payment to a company or an institution for acquiring debentures or bonds issued by it.

Amount exceeding ` 50,000.
6. Payment to the Reserve Bank of India for acquiring bonds issued by it.

Amount exceeding ` 50,000.
7. Deposit with a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act); or post office

Cash deposits exceeding ` 50,000 during any one day.
8. Purchase of bank drafts or pay orders or banker’s cheques from a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act).

Payment in cash of an amount exceeding ` 50,000 during any one day.
9. A time deposit with, -

(i) a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies or aggregating to more than ` 5 lakh during a financial year.

Amount exceeding ` 50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.28 INCOME TAX LAW

applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);

- (ii) a Post Office;
- (iii) a Nidhi referred to in section 406 of the Companies Act, 2013; or
- (iv) a non-banking financial company which holds a certificate of registration under section 45-IA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to hold or accept deposit from public.

13. Payment for one or more pre-paid payment instruments, as defined in the policy guidelines for issuance and operation of pre-paid payment instruments issued by Reserve Bank of India under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, to a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act) or to any other company or institution.

Payment in cash or by way of a bank draft or pay order or banker’s cheque of an amount aggregating to more than ` 50,000 in a financial year.

14. Payment as life insurance premium to an insurer as defined in the Insurance Act, 1938.

Amount aggregating to more than ` 50,000 in a financial year.

15. A contract for sale or purchase of securities (other than shares) as defined in section 2(h) of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.

Amount exceeding ` 1 lakh per transaction.

16. Sale or purchase, by any person, of shares of a company not listed in a recognised stock exchange.

Amount exceeding ` 1 lakh per transaction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

|17.|Sale or purchase of any immovable property.|Amount exceeding ` 10 lakh or valued by stamp valuation authority referred to in section 50C at an amount exceeding ` 10 lakh|
|---|---|---|
|18.|Sale or purchase, by any person, of goods or services of any nature other than those specified at Sl. No. 1 to 17 of this Table, if any.|Amount exceeding ` 2 lakh per transaction|

Minor to quote PAN of parent or guardian

Where a person, entering into any transaction referred to in this rule, is a minor and who does not have any income chargeable to income-tax, he shall quote the PAN of his father or mother or guardian, as the case may be, in the document pertaining to the said transaction.

Declaration by a person not having PAN

Any person, not being a company or a firm who does not have a PAN and who enters into any transaction specified in this rule, shall make a declaration in Form No.60 giving therein the particulars of such transaction either in paper form or electronically under the electronic verification code in accordance with the procedures, data structures, and standards specified by the Principal Director General of Income-tax (Systems) or Director General of Income-tax (Systems).

However, in case of a foreign company who does not have any income chargeable to tax in India and does not have a PAN and enters into transaction referred to at Sl. No. 2 or 12 of the above table, in an IFSC banking unit, it has to make a declaration in Form No. 60.

Non-applicability of Rule 114B

The provisions of this rule shall not apply to the following class or classes of persons, namely:-

3 A financial institution defined under section 3(1)(c) of the IFSC Authority Act, 2019, that is licensed or permitted by the IFSC to undertake permissible activities under the IFSC Authority (Banking) Regulations, 2020.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.30 INCOME TAX LAW

(i) the Central Government, the State Governments and the Consular Offices;

(ii) the non-residents referred to in section 2(30) in respect of the transactions other than a transaction referred to at Sl. No. 1 or 2 or 4 or 7 or 8 or 10 or 12 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 of the Table.

# Meaning of certain phrases:

|Phrase|Inclusion|
|---|---|
|(1) Payment in connection with travel|Payment towards fare, or to a travel agent or a tour operator, or to an authorized person as defined in section 2(c) of the FEMA, 1999|
|(2) Travel agent or tour operator|A person who makes arrangements for air, surface or maritime travel or provides services relating to accommodation, tours, entertainment, passport, visa, foreign exchange, travel related insurance or other travel related services either severally or in package|
|(3) Time deposit|Any deposit which is repayable on the expiry of a fixed period.|

(8) If there is a change in the address or in the name and nature of the business of a person, on the basis of which PAN was allotted to him, he should intimate such change to the Assessing Officer [Section 139A (5)(d)].

(9) Every person who receives any document relating to any transaction cited above shall ensure that the PAN or the Aadhaar number is duly quoted in the document.

(10) Intimation of PAN to person deducting or collecting tax at source Every person who receives any amount from which tax has been deducted at source shall intimate his PAN to the person responsible for deducting such tax [Section 139A(5A)]. Similarly, every buyer or licensee or lessee referred to in section 206C shall intimate his PAN to the person responsible for collecting such tax [Section 139A(5C)].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 8.31

# (11) Quoting of PAN in certain documents

Where any amount has been paid after deducting tax at source, the person deducting tax shall quote the PAN of the person to whom the amount was paid in the following documents:

1. in the statement furnished under section 192(2C) giving particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of salary provided to any employee;
2. in all certificates for tax deducted issued to the person to whom payment is made;
3. in all returns prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered to any income-tax authority in accordance with the provisions of section 206;
4. in all statements prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered in accordance with the provisions of section 200(3) [Section 139A(5B)].

Also, every person collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of section 206C shall quote PAN of every buyer or licensee or lessee in the following documents:

1. in all certificates issued for tax collected in accordance with the provisions of section 206C(5);
2. in all returns prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered to any income-tax authority in accordance with the provisions of section 206C(5A)/(5B);
3. in all statements prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered in accordance with the provisions of section 206C(3) [Sub-section (5D)].

# (12) Requirement to intimate PAN and quote PAN not to apply to certain persons

Section 139A(5A)/(5B) shall not apply to a person who –

1. does not have taxable income or
2. who is not required to obtain PAN if such person furnishes a declaration under section 197A in the prescribed form and manner that the tax on his estimated total income for that previous year will be Nil.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.32 INCOME TAX LAW

# (13) Inter-changeability of PAN with the Aadhaar number

Every person who is required to furnish or intimate or quote his PAN may furnish or intimate or quote his Aadhaar Number in lieu of the PAN, if he

- has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar number
- has been allotted a PAN and has intimated his Aadhaar number to prescribed authority in accordance with the requirement contained in section 139AA(2).

PAN would be allotted in prescribed manner to a person who has not been allotted a PAN but possesses Aadhaar number.

Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 59/2019, dated 30.8.2019, provide that any person, who has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar number and has furnished or intimated or quoted his Aadhaar number in lieu of the PAN, shall be deemed to have applied for allotment of PAN and he shall not be required to apply or submit any documents.

Further, any person, who has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar number may apply for allotment of the PAN under section 139A(1)/(1A)/(3) by intimating his Aadhaar number and he shall not be required to apply or submit any documents.

# (14) Quoting and authentication of PAN or Aadhaar number

(a) Every person entering into such prescribed transactions is required to quote his PAN or Aadhaar number, as the case may be, in the documents pertaining to such transactions and also authenticate such PAN or Aadhaar number in the prescribed manner [Section 139A(6A)].

(b) Every person receiving such document relating to transactions referred to in (a) has to ensure that PAN or Aadhaar number has been duly quoted in such document and also ensure that such PAN or Aadhaar number is so authenticated [Section 139A(6B)].

Accordingly, Rule 114BB has been inserted to prescribe that every person has to, at the time of entering into a transaction specified in column (2) of the Table below, quote his permanent account number or Aadhaar number, as the case may be, in documents pertaining to such transaction, and every person specified in column (3) of the said Table, who receives such document, has to ensure that the said number has been duly quoted and authenticated:
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

|S. No.|Nature of transaction|Person|
|---|---|---|
|1.|Cash deposit or deposits aggregating to ` 20 lakhs or more in a financial year, in one or more account of a person with a bank or a co-operative bank or Post Office.|A bank or a co-operative bank or Post Master General of a Post Office.|
|2.|Cash withdrawal or withdrawals aggregating to ` 20 lakhs or more in a financial year, in one or more account of a person with a bank or a co-operative bank or Post Office.|A bank or a co-operative bank or Post Master General of a Post Office.|
|3.|Opening of a current account or cash credit account by a person with a bank or a co-operative bank or Post Office.|A bank or a co-operative bank or Post Master General of a Post Office.|

Note 1 – Quoting of PAN or Aadhaar number is, however, not required in case where the person depositing money as per Sl. No.1 or withdrawing money as per Sl. No.2 or opening a current account or cash credit account as per Sl. No.3 is the Central Government, the State Government or the Consular Office.

Note 2- Quoting of PAN or Aadhaar number is also not required in a case

- a) where the person, making the deposit or withdrawal of an amount otherwise than by way of cash as per Sl. No.1 or Sl. No.2 above, or opening a current account not being a cash credit account as per Sl. No.3 above, is a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign company;
- b) the transaction is entered into with an IFSC banking unit; and
- c) such non-resident (not being a company) or the foreign company does not have any income chargeable to tax in India

# Power to make rules

The CBDT is empowered to make rules with regard to the following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.34 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) the form and manner in which an application for PAN may be made and the particulars to be given therein;

(b) the categories of transactions in relation to which PAN or the Aadhaar number, as the case may be, is required to be quoted on the related documents;

(c) the categories of documents pertaining to business or profession in which PAN or the Aadhaar number, as the case may be, shall be quoted by every person;

(d) the class or classes of persons to whom the provisions of this section shall not apply;

(e) the form and manner in which a person who has not been allotted a PAN shall make a declaration;

(f) the manner in which PAN or the Aadhaar number, as the case may be, shall be quoted for transactions cited in (b) above;

(g) the time and manner in which such transactions cited in (b) above shall be intimated to the prescribed authority.

# (16) Meaning of certain terms

|Term|Meaning|
|---|---|
|(i) Aadhaar number|An identification number issued to an individual by the Authority on receipt of the demographic information and biometric information after verifying the information by the authority. It includes any alternative virtual identity generated by the Authority in the prescribed manner.|
|(ii) Authentication|The process by which the PAN or Aadhaar number along with demographic information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the income-tax authority or such other prescribed authority or agency for its verification and such authority or agency verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis of information available with it.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 8.35

# Penalty for failure to comply with the provisions of section 139A [Section 272B]

|Section|Default|Penalty|
|---|---|---|
|272B(1)|Failure to comply with the provisions of section 139A|₹ 10,000|
|272B(2)|Failure to quote PAN/Aadhaar number in any document referred to in section 139A(5)(c)|₹ 10,000 for each such default|
| |Failure to intimate PAN/Aadhaar number as required by section 139A(5A)/(5C)| |
| |Knowingly quoting or intimating a number which is false| |
|272B(2A)|Failure to quote PAN/Aadhaar Number in documents referred to in section 139A(6A) or authenticate such number in accordance with the provisions contained therein|₹ 10,000 for each such default|
|272B(2B)|(i) Failure to ensure that PAN/Aadhaar Number is duly quoted in the documents relating to transactions referred to in section 139A(5)(c) or section 139A(6A)|₹ 10,000 for each such default|
| |(ii) Failure to ensure that PAN/Aadhaar Number has been duly authenticated in respect of transactions referred to under section 139A(6A)| |

Note – It is necessary to give an opportunity to be heard to the person on whom the penalty under section 272B is proposed to be imposed.

# 14. QUOTING OF AADHAAR NUMBER [SECTION 139AA]

(1) Mandatory quoting of Aadhaar Number

Every person who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number is required to mandatorily quote Aadhaar Number:

- (a) in the application form for allotment of Permanent Account Number (PAN)
- (b) in the return of income

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.36 INCOME TAX LAW

Quoting of Aadhaar Number mandatory in returns filed on or after 1.4.2019 [Circular No. 6/2019 dated 31.03.2019]

As per section 139AA(1)(ii), with effect from 01.07.2017, every person who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar number has to quote Aadhaar number in the return of income.

The Apex Court in a series of judgments has upheld the validity of section 139AA. Consequently, with effect from 01.04.2019, the CBDT has clarified that it is mandatory to quote Aadhaar number while filing the return of income unless specifically exempted as per any notification issued under section 139AA(3) [detailed in point no. (5) in the next page]. Thus, returns being filed either electronically or manually on or after 1.4.2019 cannot be filed without quoting the Aadhaar number.

# (2) Quoting of Enrolment Id, where person does not have Aadhaar Number

If a person does not have Aadhaar Number, he is required to quote Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form issued to him at the time of enrolment in the application form for allotment of Permanent Account Number (PAN) or in the return of income furnished by him.

Enrolment ID means a 28 digit Enrolment Identification Number issued to a resident at the time of enrolment.

However, w.e.f. 1ˢᵗ October, 2024, the option of quoting Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application for allotment of Permanent Account Number (PAN) or in the return of income furnished is discontinued.

Further, a person who has been allotted permanent account number on the basis of Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form filed before 1st October, 2024 has to intimate his Aadhaar Number, on or before a notified date, to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner [Section 139AA(2A)].

# (3) Intimation of Aadhaar Number to prescribed Authority

Every person who has been allotted Permanent Account Number (PAN) as on 1ˢᵗ July, 2017, and who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number, shall intimate his Aadhaar Number to prescribed authority on or before 31ˢᵗ March, 2022.

Notwithstanding the last date of intimating/linking of Aadhaar Number with PAN being 31.03.2022, it is clarified that w.e.f. 01.04.2019, it is mandatory to quote and link Aadhaar number while filing the return of income, either.
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

manually or electronically, unless specifically exempted in cases detailed in point (5) below.

# Consequences of failure to intimate Aadhaar Number

If a person fails to intimate the Aadhaar Number, the permanent account Number (PAN) allotted to such person shall be made inoperative after the date so notified in the prescribed manner. Accordingly, Rule 114AAA specifies the manner of making permanent account number inoperative.

|Sub-Rule|Provision|
|---|---|
|(1)|If a person, who has been allotted PAN as on 1st July, 2017 and is required to intimate his Aadhaar number under section 139AA(2), has failed to intimate the same on or before 31st March, 2022, the PAN of such person would become inoperative and he would be liable for payment of fee in accordance with section 234H read with Rule 114(5A) i.e., ` 1,0004.|
|(2)|Where such person who has not intimated his Aadhaar number on or before 31st March, 2022, has intimated his Aadhaar number under section 139AA(2) after 31st March, 2022, after payment of fee specified in section 234H read with Rule 114(5A), his PAN would become operative within 30 days from the date of intimation of Aadhaar number.|
|(3)|A person, whose PAN has become inoperative, would be liable for following further consequences for the period commencing from the date as specified under (4) below till the date it becomes operative – - (i) no refund of any amount of tax or part thereof, due under the provisions of the Act;
- (ii) interest would not be payable on such refund for the period, beginning with the date specified under (4) below and ending with the date on which it becomes operative;
|

4 The fee was ` 500 if Aadhaar number was intimated on or before 30.06.2022

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.38 INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) where tax is deductible at source in case of such person, such tax shall be deducted at higher rate, in accordance with provisions of section 206AA;

(iv) where tax is collectible at source in case of such person, such tax shall be collected at higher rate, in accordance with provisions of section 206CC.

(4) The consequences in (3) above would be effective from the date specified by the Board i.e., 1.7.2023 [Circular No. 3/2023 dated 28ᵗʰ March, 2023]

(5) Clarification on consequences of PAN becoming inoperative These consequences would be with effect from 1.7.2023 and continue till the PAN becomes operative. A fee of ` 1,000 has to be paid to make the PAN operative by intimating the Aadhaar number. The consequences of PAN becoming inoperative would not be applicable to those persons who have been provided exemption from intimating Aadhaar number detailed in point (6) below.

(6) Provision not to apply to certain persons or class of persons The provisions of section 139AA relating to quoting of Aadhaar Number would, however, not apply to such person or class or classes of persons or any State or part of any State as may be notified by the Central Government. Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 37/2017 dated 11.05.2017 effective from 01.07.2017, notified that the provisions of section 139AA relating to quoting of Aadhaar Number would not apply to an individual who does not possess the Aadhaar number or Enrolment ID and is:

- (i) residing in Assam, Jammu & Kashmir and Meghalaya;
- (ii) a non-resident as per Income-tax Act, 1961;
- (iii) of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year;
- (iv) not a citizen of India

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 15. SCHEME FOR SUBMISSION OF RETURNS THROUGH TAX RETURN PREPARERS [SECTION 139B]

(1) This section provides that, for the purpose of enabling any specified class or classes of persons to prepare and furnish their returns of income, the CBDT may notify a scheme to provide that such persons may furnish their returns of income through a Tax Return Preparer authorised to act as such under the Scheme.

(2) The Tax Return Preparer shall assist the persons furnishing the return in a manner that will be specified in the Scheme and shall also affix his signature on such return.

(3) A Tax Return Preparer means any individual, other than

- (i) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the assessee maintains a current account or has other regular dealings.
- (ii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India.
- (iii) an accountant
- (iv) an employee of the ‘specified class or classes of persons’ who has been authorized to act as a Tax Return Preparer under the Scheme.

(4) The “specified class or classes of persons” for this purpose means any person other than a company or a person whose accounts are required to be audited under section 44AB (tax audit) or under any other existing law, who is required to furnish a return of income under the Act.

(5) The Scheme notified under the said section may provide for the following -

- (i) the manner in which and the period for which the Tax Return Preparers shall be authorised,
- (ii) the educational and other qualifications to be possessed, and the training and other conditions required to be fulfilled, by a person to act as a Tax Return Preparer,
- (iii) the code of conduct for the Tax Return Preparers,
- (iv) the duties and obligations of the Tax Return Preparers,
- (v) the circumstances under which the authorisation given to a Tax Return Preparer may be revoked.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.40 INCOME TAX LAW

Preparer may be withdrawn, and (v) any other relevant matter as may be specified by the Scheme.

(6) Accordingly, the CBDT has, in exercise of the powers conferred by this section, framed the Tax Return Preparer Scheme, 2006, which came into force from 1.12.2006.

|Particulars|Contents|
|---|---|
|Applicability of the scheme|The scheme is applicable to all eligible persons.|
|Eligible person|Any person being an individual or a Hindu undivided family.|
|Tax Return Preparer|Any individual who has been issued a "Tax Return Preparer Certificate" and a "unique identification number" under this Scheme by the Partner Organisation to carry on the profession of preparing the returns of income in accordance with the Scheme. However, the following person are not entitled to act as Tax Return Preparer: (i) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the assessee maintains a current account or has other regular dealings. (ii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India. (iii) an accountant.|
|Educational qualification for Tax Return Preparers|An individual, who holds a bachelor degree from a recognised Indian University or institution, or has passed the intermediate level examination conducted by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or the Institute of Company Secretaries of India or the Institute of Cost Accountants of India, shall be eligible to act as Tax Return Preparer.|
|Preparation of and furnishing the Return of Income by the Tax Return Preparer|An eligible person may, at his option, furnish his return of income under section 139 for any assessment year after getting it prepared through a Tax Return Preparer.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

However, the following eligible person (an individual or a HUF) cannot furnish a return of income for an assessment year through a Tax Return Preparer:

1. who is carrying out business or profession during the previous year and accounts of the business or profession for that previous year are required to be audited under section 44AB or under any other law for the time being in force; or
2. who is not a resident in India during the previous year.

An eligible person cannot furnish a revised return of income for any assessment year through a Tax Return Preparer unless he has furnished the original return of income for that assessment year through such or any other Tax Return Preparer.

Note - It may be noted that as per section 139B(3), an employee of the “specified class or classes of persons” is not authorized to act as a Tax Return Preparer. Therefore, it follows that employees of companies and persons whose accounts are required to be audited under section 44AB or any other law for the time being in force (since they are not falling in the category of specified class or classes of persons), are eligible to act as Tax Return Preparers.

# ILLUSTRATION 3

Mrs. Hetal, an individual engaged in the business of Beauty Parlour, has got her books of account for the financial year ended on 31st March, 2025 audited under section 44AB. Her total income for the A.Y. 2025-26 is ` 6,35,000. She wants to furnish her return of income for A.Y. 2025-26 through a tax return preparer. Can she do so?

# SOLUTION

Section 139B provides a scheme for submission of return of income for any assessment year through a Tax Return Preparer. However, it is not applicable to persons whose books of account are required to be audited under section 44AB. Therefore, Mrs. Hetal cannot furnish her return of income for A.Y.2025-26 through a Tax Return Preparer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.42 INCOME TAX LAW

# 16. PERSONS AUTHORISED TO VERIFY RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 140]

This section specifies the persons who are authorized to verify the return of income under section 139.

|Assessee|Circumstance|Authorised Persons|
|---|---|---|
|1. Individual|(i) In circumstances not covered under (ii), (iii) & (iv) below|- the individual himself|
| |(ii) where he is absent from India|- the individual himself; or - any person duly authorised by him in this behalf holding a valid power of attorney from the individual (Such power of attorney should be attached to the return of income)|
| |(iii) where he is mentally incapacitated from attending to his affairs|- his guardian; or - any other person competent to act on his behalf|
| |(iv) where, for any other reason, it is not possible for the individual to verify the return|- any person duly authorised by him in this behalf holding a valid power of attorney from the individual, which should be attached to the return of income.|
|2. Hindu Undivided Family|(i) in circumstances not covered under (ii) and (iii) below|- the karta|
| |(ii) where the karta is absent from India|- any other adult member of the HUF|
| |(iii) where the karta is mentally incapacitated| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

incapacitated from attending to his affairs

# 3. Company

1. (i) in circumstances not covered under (i) to (vi) below
2. (ii)
1. (a) where for any unavoidable reason any director of such managing company or any other person as may be prescribed for this purpose is not able to verify the return; or
2. (b) where there is no managing director
3. (iii) where the company is not resident in India - the managing director of the company (or) - a person who holds a valid power of attorney from such company to do so (such power of attorney should be attached to the return).
4. (iv)
1. (a) Where the company is being wound up (whether under the orders of a court or otherwise); or
2. (b) where any person has been appointed as the receiver of any assets of the company
5. (v) Where the management of the company has been taken over by the Central Government - the principal officer of the company

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.44 INCOME TAX LAW

or any State Government under any law

# 4. Firm

(i) in circumstances not covered under (ii) below

(ii)

|(a) where for any unavoidable reason such managing partner is not able to verify the return;|- any partner of the firm, not being a minor|
|---|---|
|(b) where there is no managing partner.|- any partner of the firm, not being a minor|

# 5. LLP

(i) in circumstances not covered under (ii) below

(ii)

(a) where for any unavoidable reason any partner of the LLP or such designated partner is not able to verify the return;(b) where there is no designated partner.
# 6. Local authority

- the principal officer

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

|7.|Political party|-|-|the chief executive officer of such party (whether he is known as secretary or by any other designation)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|8.|Any other association|-|-|any member of the association or the principal officer of such association|
|9.|Any other person|-|-|that person or some other person competent to act on his behalf.|

Any other person in case of company and LLP - The CBDT has, vide Notification No. 93/2021 dated 18.8.2021, specified that “any other person” referred to in section 140(c) and 140(cd) for company and LLP, respectively, shall be the person, appointed by the Adjudicating Authority (i.e., National Company Law Tribunal constituted under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013) for discharging the duties and functions of an interim resolution professional, a resolution professional, or a liquidator, as the case may be, under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and the rules and regulations made thereunder.

5 Referred to in section 139(4B), which will be dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.46 INCOME TAX LAW

# LET US RECAPITULATE

|Section|Particulars|
|---|---|
|139(1)|Assessees required to file return of income compulsorily|
| |(i) Companies and firms (whether having profit or loss or nil income);|
| |(ii) a person, being a resident other than not ordinarily resident, having any asset (including any financial interest in any entity) located outside India held as a beneficial owner or beneficiary or who has a signing authority in any account located outside India, whether or not having income chargeable to tax;|
| |(iii) Individuals, HUF, AOPs or BOIs and artificial juridical persons whose total income before giving effect to the provisions of Chapter VI-A and sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54EC or 54F exceeds the basic exemption limit.|
| |(iv) Any person other than a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1), who during the previous year –|
| |- has deposited more than ` 1 crore in one or more current accounts maintained with a banking company or a co-operative bank; or|
| |- has incurred expenditure of more than ` 2 lakh for himself or any other person for travel to a foreign country; or|
| |- has incurred expenditure of more than ` 1 lakh towards consumption of electricity; or|
| |- fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed|
| |Accordingly, the CBDT has notified that any person other than a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1) has to file their return of income on or before due date -|
| |(i) if his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business > ` 60 lakhs during the previous year;|

# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

(ii) if his total gross receipts in profession > ` 10 lakhs during the previous year; or

(iii) if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year, in the case of the person, is ` 25,000 or more; or

However, a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or more, at any time during the relevant previous year, if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year, in his case, is ` 50,000 or more

(iv) the deposit in one or more savings bank account of the person, in aggregate, is ` 50 lakhs or more during the previous year.

# Due date of filing return of income

(i) 31ˢᵗ October of the assessment year, in case the assessee (other than an assessee referred to in (ii) below) is:

- (a) a company;
- (b) a person (other than company) whose accounts are required to be audited; or
- (c) a partner of a firm whose accounts are required to be audited.

(ii) 30th November of the assessment year, in the case of an assessee including the partners of the firm being such assessee who is required to furnish a report referred to in section 92E.

(iii) 31ˢᵗ July of the assessment year, in case of any other assessee.

# 139(3) Return of loss

An assessee can carry forward or set off his/its losses provided he/it has filed his/its return under section 139(3), within the due date specified under section 139(1).

# Exceptions

Loss from house property and unabsorbed depreciation can be carried forward for set-off even though return has not been filed before the due date.

# 139(4) Belated Return

A return of income for any previous year, which has not been furnished within the time allowed u/s 139(1), may be furnished at any time before the:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.48 INCOME TAX LAW

# (i)

three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or

# (ii)

completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.

# 139(5) Revised Return

If any omission or any wrong statement is discovered in a return furnished u/s 139(1) or belated return u/s 139(4), a revised return may be furnished by the assessee at any time before the:

# (i)

three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or

# (ii)

completion of assessment, whichever is earlier.

Thus, belated return can also be revised.

# 234A Interest for default in furnishing return of income

Interest under section 234A is payable where an assessee furnishes the return of income after the due date or does not furnish the return of income.

Assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest @1% per month or part of the month for the period commencing from the date immediately following the due date and ending on the following dates –

|Circumstances|Ending on the following dates|
|---|---|
|Where the return is furnished after due date|the date of furnishing of the return|
|Where no return is furnished|the date of completion of assessment|

However, where the assessee has paid taxes in full on or before the due date, interest under section 234A is not leviable.

# 140A Self-Assessment tax

Where any tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be furnished under section 139, after taking into account –

# (i)

the amount of tax, already paid,

# (ii)

the tax deducted or collected at source

# (iii)

any relief of tax claimed under section 89

# (iv)

any tax credit claimed to be set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and

(v) any tax and interest payable as per the provisions of section 191(2)

the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax before furnishing the return.

Where the amount paid by the assessee under section 140A(1) falls short of the aggregate of the tax, interest and fee as aforesaid, the amount so paid shall first be adjusted towards the fee payable and thereafter, towards interest and the balance shall be adjusted towards the tax payable.

# 139(8A) Updated Return

Any person may, whether or not he has furnished a return under section 139(1) or belated return under section 139(4) or revised return under section 139(5) for that assessment year, furnish an updated return of his income or the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable, for the previous year relevant to the assessment year at any time within 24 months from the end of the relevant assessment year.

The provisions of updated return would not apply, if the updated return of such person for that assessment year –

- (i) is a loss return; or
- (ii) has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability determined on the basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5); or
- (iii) results in refund or increases the refund due on the basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5).

No updated return can be furnished by any person for the relevant assessment year, where –

- (a) an updated return has been furnished by him under this sub-section for the relevant assessment year; or
- (b) any proceeding for assessment or reassessment or recomputation or revision of income is pending or has been completed for the relevant assessment year in his case;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.50 INCOME TAX LAW

# 140B Tax on Updated Return

Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before furnishing updated return of income if no return is furnished earlier - Where no return of income has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional tax computed under section 140B(3), before furnishing the return.

The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional income-tax, interest and fee. The tax payable is to be computed after taking into account the following -

- (i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid, as advance tax
- (ii) the tax deducted or collected at source
- (iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89; and
- (iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

In a case, where no earlier return has been furnished, the interest payable under section 234A has to be computed on the amount of the tax on the total income as declared in the updated return under section 139(8A), in accordance with the provisions of section 140A(1A).

Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before furnishing updated return of income if return is furnished earlier - Where, return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) or 139(5) has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest payable under any provision of this Act for any default or delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional tax.
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

additional tax computed u/s 140B(3), as reduced by the amount of interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier return, before furnishing the return.

The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional income-tax and interest.

The tax payable has to be computed after taking into account the following -

1. the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the credit for which has been taken in the earlier return
2. the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection and which is taken into account in computing total income and which has not been included in the earlier return
3. any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in the earlier return, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

The aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier return.

# Additional income-tax payable at the time of updated return

The additional tax payable at the time of furnishing the updated return under section 139(8A) would be –

1. 25% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined above, if such return is furnished after expiry of the time available under section 139(4) or 139(5) and before completion of the period of 12 months from the end of the relevant assessment year; or
2. 50% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined above, if such return is furnished after the expiry of 12 months from the end of the relevant A.Y. but before completion of the period of 24 months from the end of the relevant A.Y.

# 139(9) Defective Return

Where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income is defective, he may intimate the defect to the assessee and give him an opportunity to rectify the defect within 15 days from the date of
# 8.52 INCOME TAX LAW

intimation or within such further period, which, the Assessing Officer may allow in his discretion on an application made by the assessee in this behalf. If the defect is not rectified within such period, the return would be treated as an invalid return. Consequently, the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 would apply as if the assessee had failed to furnish the return. However, where the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of 15 days or further period allowed by the Assessing Officer but before the assessment is made, the Assessing Officer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid return.

# 234F Fee for default in furnishing return of income

Where a person who is required to furnish a return of income under section 139, fails to do so within the prescribed time limit under section 139(1), he shall pay, by way of fee, a sum of ` 5,000. However, if the total income of the person does not exceed ` 5 lakhs, the fees payable shall not exceed ` 1,000.

# 139A Permanent Account Number (PAN)

Quoting of PAN is mandatory in all documents pertaining to the following prescribed transactions:

- (a) in all returns to, or correspondence with, any income-tax authority;
- (b) in all challans for the payment of any sum due under the Act;
- (c) in all documents pertaining to such transactions entered into by him, as may be prescribed by the CBDT in the interests of revenue. For example, sale or purchase of a motor vehicle, payment in cash of an amount exceeding ` 50,000 to a hotel against a bill or bills at any one time, etc.

Inter-changeability of PAN with the Aadhaar number: Every person who is required to furnish or intimate or quote his PAN may furnish or intimate or quote his Aadhaar Number in lieu of the PAN if he:

- - has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar number;
- - has been allotted a PAN and has intimated his Aadhaar number to prescribed authority in accordance with the requirement contained in section 139AA(2).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

# 139AA Quoting of Aadhaar Number

To be quoted by every person on or after 1.7.2017 in the application for allotment of PAN and in return of income.

If a person does not have Aadhaar Number, the Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form issued to him at the time of enrolment shall be quoted.

However, w.e.f. 1ˢᵗ October, 2024, the option of quoting Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application for allotment of PAN or in the return of income furnished is discontinued.

Further, a person who has been allotted PAN on the basis of Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form filed before 1st October, 2024 has to intimate his Aadhaar Number, on or before a notified date, to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner.

Every person who has been allotted PAN as on 1.7.2017 and who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number, has to intimate his Aadhaar Number to the prescribed authority on or before 31.3.2022.

If such person has failed to intimate the same on or before 31st March, 2022, the PAN of such person would become inoperative and he would be liable for payment of fee in accordance with section 234H read with Rule 114(5A) i.e., ` 1,000.

Where such person who has not intimated his Aadhaar number on or before 31st March, 2022, has intimated his Aadhaar number under section 139AA(2) after 31st March, 2022, after payment of fee specified in section 234H read with Rule 114(5A), his PAN would become operative within 30 days from the date of intimation of Aadhaar number.

The consequences of inoperative PAN would be effective from the date specified by the Board i.e., 1.7.2023 [Circular No. 3/2023 dated 28ᵗʰ March, 2023]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# 8.54 INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. State with reasons whether you agree or disagree with the following statements:
1. Return of income of Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) could be verified by any partner.
2. Time limit for filing return under section 139(1) in the case of Mr. A having total turnover of ` 160 lakhs (` 100 lakhs received in cash) for the year ended 31.03.2025 whether or not declaring presumptive income under section 44AD, is 31st October, 2025.
2. Mr. Vineet exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and submits his return of income under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act) on 12-09-2025 for A.Y. 2025-26 consisting of income under the head “Salaries”, “Income from house property” and bank interest. On 21-12-2025, he realized that he had not claimed deduction under section 80TTA in respect of his interest income on the Savings Bank Account. He wants to revise his return of income. Can he do so? Examine. Would your answer be different if he discovered this omission on 21-03-2026?
3. Examine with reasons, whether the following statements are true or false, with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:
1. The Assessing Officer has the power, inter alia, to allot PAN to any person by whom no tax is payable.
2. Where the Karta of a HUF is absent from India, the return of income can be verified by any male member of the family.
4. Explain the term “return of loss” under the Income-tax Act, 1961. Can any loss be carried forward even if return of loss has not been filed as required?
5. Mr. Aakash has undertaken certain transactions during the F.Y.2024-25, which are listed below. You are required to identify the transactions in respect of which quoting of PAN is mandatory in the related documents.
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

|S. No.|Transaction|
|---|---|
|1.|Payment of life insurance premium of ` 45,000 in the F.Y.2024-25 by account payee cheque to LIC for insuring life of self and spouse|
|2.|Payment of ` 1,00,000 to a five-star hotel for stay for 5 days with family, out of which ` 60,000 was paid in cash|
|3.|Payment of ` 80,000 by ECS through bank account for acquiring the debentures of A Ltd., an Indian company|
|4.|Payment of ` 95,000 by account payee cheque to Thomas Cook for travel to Dubai for 3 days to visit relatives|
|5.|Applied to SBI for issue of credit card.|

# ANSWERS

1. (a) Disagree

The return of income of LLP should be verified by a designated partner. Any other partner can verify the Return of Income of LLP only in the following cases:

- (i) where for any unavoidable reason such designated partner is not able to verify the return, or,
- (ii) where there is no designated partner.

(b) Disagree

In case Mr. A offers his business income as per the presumptive taxation provisions of section 44AD (` 11.60 lakhs or more), then, the due date under section 139(1) for filing of return of income for the year ended 31.03.2025, shall be 31st July, 2025. In case, Mr. A wants to declare business income lower than ` 11.60 lakhs, he has to get his accounts audited under section 44AB, since his turnover exceeds ` 1 crore, in which case, the due date for filing return would be 31ˢᵗ October, 2025.
2. Since Mr. Vineet has income only under the heads “Salaries”, “Income from house property” and “Income from other sources”, he does not fall under the
# 8.56 INCOME TAX LAW

category of a person whose accounts are required to be audited under the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law in force. Therefore, the due date of filing return for A.Y.2025-26 under section 139(1), in his case, is 31st July, 2025. Since Mr. Vineet had submitted his return only on 12.9.2025, the said return is a belated return under section 139(4).

As per section 139(5), a return furnished under section 139(1) or a belated return u/s 139(4) can be revised. Thus, a belated return under section 139(4) can also be revised. Therefore, Mr. Vineet can revise the return of income filed by him under section 139(4) in December 2025, to claim deduction under section 80TTA, since the time limit for filing a revised return is three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year, which is 31.12.2025. However, he cannot revise return had he discovered this omission only on 21-03-2026, since it is beyond 31.12.2025.

# 3.

(i) True: Section 139A(2) provides that the Assessing Officer may, having regard to the nature of transactions as may be prescribed, also allot a PAN to any other person, whether any tax is payable by him or not, in the manner and in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed.

(ii) False: Section 140(b) provides that where the Karta of a HUF is absent from India, the return of income can be verified by any other adult member of the family; such member can be a male or female member.

# 4.

A return of loss is a return which shows certain losses. Section 80 provides that the losses specified therein cannot be carried forward, unless such losses are determined in pursuance of return filed under the provisions of section 139(3).

Section 139(3) states that to carry forward the losses specified therein, the return should be filed within the time specified in section 139(1).

Following losses are covered by section 139(3):

- business loss to be carried forward under section 72(1),
- speculation business loss to be carried forward under section 73(2),
- loss from specified business to be carried forward under section 73A(2), in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# PROVISIONS FOR FILING RETURN OF INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT

• loss under the head “Capital Gains” to be carried forward under section 74(1); and

• loss incurred in the activity of owning and maintaining race horses to be carried forward under section 74A(3)

However, loss from house property to be carried forward under section 71B and unabsorbed depreciation under section 32 can be carried forward even if return of loss has not been filed as required under section 139(3).

# 5. Transaction

# Is quoting of PAN mandatory in related documents?

|1.|Payment of life insurance premium of ` 45,000 in the F.Y.2024-25 by account payee cheque to LIC for insuring life of self and spouse|No, since the amount paid does not exceed ` 50,000 in the F.Y.2024-25.|
|---|---|---|
|2.|Payment of ` 1,00,000 to a five-star hotel for stay for 5 days with family, out of which ` 60,000 was paid in cash|Yes, since the amount paid in cash exceeds ` 50,000|
|3.|Payment of ` 80,000, by ECS through bank account, for acquiring the debentures of A Ltd., an Indian company|Yes, since the amount paid for acquiring debentures exceeds ` 50,000. Mode of payment is not relevant in this case.|
|4.|Payment of ` 95,000 by account payee cheque to Thomas Cook for travel to Dubai for 3 days to visit relatives|No, since the amount was paid by account payee cheque, quoting of PAN is not mandatory even though the payment exceeds ` 50,000|
|5.|Applied to SBI for issue of credit card.|Yes, quoting of PAN is mandatory on making an application to a banking company for issue of credit card.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# OVERVIEW OF SECTION V

This section comprises of Chapter 9 Income-tax liability – Computation and Optimisation. It involves integration of the provisions dealt with in all the earlier chapters to compute the total income and tax payable by an individual. The following is the procedure for computing total income and tax payable by an individual –

|Step|Step-by-step Procedure|
|---|---|
|1|Determine his residential status to find out the scope of his total income.|
|2|Classify the income chargeable to tax under the five heads, namely, Salaries, Income from house property, Profits and gains of business or profession, Capital Gains and Income from Other Sources, considering the charging and deeming provisions thereunder.|
|3|Compute the income under each head, after considering the permissible and impermissible deductions, which would depend upon the regime under which the individual is paying tax i.e., whether under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.|
|4|Apply the clubbing provisions under the Act.|
|5|Apply the set-off and carry forward and set-off provisions.|
|6|Compute the gross total income.|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Page 1
7 Allow the permissible deductions under sections 80C to 80U under Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA to arrive at the total income. Here again, if an individual is paying tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, only deduction under section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and 80JJAA would be allowable.

8 Compute the total income [Total Income = GTI – Deductions under Chapter VIA – Deduction under section 10AA, if eligible]

9 Apply the tax rates on total income. The tax rates will depend on whether he pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or under the normal provisions of the Act. Special rates under section 112 and 112A would apply to long-term capital gains; under section 111A to short-term capital gains on transfer of listed equity shares and units of equity oriented fund; and under section 115BB/115BBJ to casual income. These special rates will be applicable under both tax regimes.

10 - Add surcharge on income-tax, if applicable, on the income-tax so computed. Surcharge@10% is leviable on income-tax on total income above ` 50 lakh. Higher rates of surcharge would apply with increase in total income above specified threshold limits. The highest rate of surcharge is 25% of income-tax computed under section 115BAC, where total income exceeds ` 2 crores; whereas it is 37% of income-tax computed under the normal provisions of the Act, where total income exceeds ` 5 crores.

- Allow rebate u/s 87A, if total income does not exceed the prescribed limits under the default tax regime under section 115BAC and under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.

11 Add Health and education cess@4% to the income-tax plus surcharge, if applicable/minus rebate, if applicable. The resultant figure would be the tax liability of the individual.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India Page 2
# 12

Compute Tax liability = Income-tax computed + Surcharge, if applicable, on income-tax (or) – Rebate u/s 87A, if applicable + HEC@4%

# 13

Compute Alternate Minimum Tax on Adjusted total income. Alternate Minimum Tax provisions would apply in case of an individual shifting out of the default tax regime and paying tax as per the normal provisions of the Act, if he is claiming certain deductions, like section 10AA, 35AD, 80JJAA, 80QQB and 80RRB. Tax liability would be the higher of tax computed under the regular provisions and alternate minimum tax.

# 14

Deduct TDS, TCS and advance tax from the tax liability to arrive at the tax payable by an individual.

# To Do

Read the Scenario below containing the details of income of Mr. Raj and his brother Mr. Rahul, both of whom are resident and ordinarily resident in India for the P.Y.2024-25. Fill in the correct figures in the shaded boxes in the income computation sheets and tax computation sheets given and advise them whether to pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or not.

# SCENARIO

Mr. Raj is an MBA employed with a multinational company in Mumbai. He is living in a rented house in Mumbai for which he pays rent of ` 70,000 p.m. He owns a house in Kolkata in which his parents are living. He purchased the house two years back by taking loan from Bank of India. Interest of ` 3,00,000 is due for P.Y.2024-25, out of which he paid ` 2,75,000 during the year. He made principal repayment of ` 1,50,000 to Bank of India during the year. In respect of this house, he paid municipal taxes of ` 5,000 this year. He sold a vacant land in Pune for ` 25,00,000. He had purchased the land last year for ` 20,00,000. He sold listed

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Page 3
equity shares of ABC Ltd. for ` 4 lakhs. He had purchased these shares in the year 2022 for ` 6.50 lakhs. Securities transaction tax has been paid both at the time of purchase and sale. During the year, he won ` 50,000 in a lottery. He has two daughters who are studying in class IX and XI in a reputed school in Mumbai. The tuition fee paid by him per month is ` 5,500 for each child. His elder daughter, aged 15 years, is a talented dancer. She earned ` 30,000 from dance shows performed by her during the year. She deposited the said amount in the bank and earned interest of ` 3,000. Mr. Raj’s wife is a teacher in a private school whose monthly salary is ` 40,000. She has no other income.

Mr. Raj’s brother Rahul is carrying on the business of manufacturing textiles. His turnover is around ` 4 crores this year and last year. 90% of his receipts are through permissible electronic modes and the remaining 10% is through cash. All payments are made through permissible electronic modes. He has installed new plant and machinery for ` 5 lakhs in May, 2024. His net profit as per the statement of profit and loss for the year 2024-25 is ` 40,50,000. Normal depreciation computed as per the Income-tax Rules, 1962 has been debited to the statement of profit and loss. However, additional depreciation, if any, available to him, is yet to be given effect to. This year, he incurred in-house scientific research expenditure of ` 2 lakhs related to his business. He also contributed ` 50,000 to IIT, Delhi for scientific research. The scientific research expenditure and contribution to scientific research have not been debited to the statement of profit and loss.

He had employed 20 new employees from 1ˢᵗ June, 2024 at a salary of ` 20,000 p.m. Their salary has been debited to the statement of profit and loss. Rahul has let out his apartment in Bangalore from which he gets a rent of ` 30,000 p.m. He pays municipal taxes of ` 4,000 in respect of this apartment. He pays interest of ` 3,00,000 this year in respect of housing loan taken from Axis Bank for purchase of this house. The principal repayment made this year is ` 1,60,000. He has been complying with all the statutory requirements under the Income-tax Act, 1961, timely.
From the details given above and in columns (1) and (2) of the income computation sheets given below, find out the figures, if any, to be filled up in the shaded boxes in the income computation sheet given below –

- in column (3) (both the inner and outer columns of column 3) under the default tax regime as per section 115BAC and
- in column (4) (both the inner and outer columns of column 4) under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.

Remember, it is possible that you may not have to fill up anything at all in some of the shaded boxes. Also, remember that you have to consider facts given in the description above as well as the facts in column (1) and (2) of the income computation sheets below in making your computations. Some of the facts given in the description above are also repeated in column (2) below.

After determining the total income for A.Y.2025-26, fill up the tax computation sheets to find out the tax liability of Mr. Raj and Mr. Rahul under both tax regimes. Based on your computation, advise Raj and Rahul whether they should pay tax under the default tax regime or not in order to optimise their tax liability. Ignore interest, if any, u/s 234B and 234C.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Page 5
# Computation of total income of Mr. Raj for A.Y.2025-26

# Under optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

(4)
24,00,000
24,000
2,400
9,60,000

# Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

(3)
24,00,000
24,000
2,400
9,60,000

# Summary

|72,000|48,000|24,00,000|24,000|2,400|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Amount|9,60,000|7,20,000| | |

# Details

(2) Actual in DA forms part of pay for retirement

House Rent allowance 30% of basic

|Basic Salary =|Gross Salary|
|---|---|
|4,800|2,000 p.m.|
|4,000 p.m.|Balance 50% is paid by Mr. Raj|

# Other Allowances

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Education Allowance|3,000 p.m. for each child|
|Entertainment allowance| |
|Transport allowance| |
|Professional tax|(50% of professional tax of 40%)|

# Salaries

|Salaries|Dearness benefits|Children|
|---|---|---|
|salary|salary| |

Page 6
# Current Tax Regime

per the normal provisions of the Act

# Optional Tax Regime

Under optional tax regime as per section 115BAC

# Default Tax Regime

Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

|Amount|amount]|5|in|
|---|---|---|---|
|Municipal taxes paid by Mr. Raj|property|for|loan|

# Entertainment Allowance

# Deductions

# Deductions u/s 16

# Deductions u/s 24

|Particulars|Amount|
|---|---|
|Professional tax paid| |
|Standard deduction| |
|Gross Annual Value| |
|Net Annual Value| |
|from|on purchase of flat|
|(in Kolkata)|due Income/Loss|
|Net Salary| |
|30% of NAV| |
|Income| |
|Less:| |
|Less:| |
|Less:| |

# Current Tax Regime

# Optional Tax Regime

(4)
Act
5,00,000
11,000

# Default Tax Regime

(3)
5,00,000
11,000

5,00,000 (2,50,000) Yes/No 11,000

Amount amount]

[Actual in

# Capital Gains

Can the capital loss on sale of shares be set-off against the capital gains?

Otherwise, write gross amount in the inner column of column 3 and 4.

# STCG/LTCG

(Strikethrough whichever is incorrect) write

# STCL/LTCL

(Strikethrough whichever is incorrect)

# Income from Other Sources

|Particulars|Sale of land|Sale of shares|Interest on savings bank account|
|---|---|---|---|
|Income under this head|column|net|the|

Capital Gains on sale of land?

If the loss is incorrect) write

Yes, inner

Page 8
# Income of minor child – whether

If yes,–  (Strike –  (Strike shows deposits which income and how much? through whichever is incorrect)

Under optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

(4)
25,000
50,000
Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

(3)
25,000
50,000
Amount

25,000
50,000
30,000
3,000
# Particulars

|(1)|Income from lotteries|Gross Total Income|Deductions|Under section 80C|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Includible/Not|Includible/Not|Interest on|Income|Income|

Less:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# Current Tax Regime Overview

# 1. Under optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

# 2. Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

# 3. Amount

# 4. Loss, if any, to be carried forward

|Particulars|Under section 80TTA|A.Y.2026-27|
|---|---|---|
|Total deductions under Chapter VI| | |
|Total Income| | |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (Mention here)
# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Raj for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Income|Tax on total income|Total tax liability|
|---|---|---|---|
|Lottery income|5,00,000 @ 5%|Nil|12,500|
|Tax on capital gains|2,50,000|Tax on balance|30,000|
|Total tax liability (before cess)| |10,00,000 @ 20%|50,000|
| | |Health and education cess @ 4%| |
| | |Total tax liability (Rounded off)|10,00,000 [......................... @ 30%]|

# Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

|Particulars|Income|Tax on total income|Total tax liability|
|---|---|---|---|
|Lottery income|7,00,000 @ 5%|Nil|15,00,000 [……………….. @ 30%]|
|Tax on capital gains|3,00,000|Tax on balance|12,00,000 @ 15%|
|Total tax liability (before cess)| |10,00,000 @ 10%|50,000|
| | |Health and education cess @ 4%| |
| | |Total tax liability (Rounded off)|12,00,000 [……………….. @ 30%]|

# Computation of total income of Mr. Rahul for A.Y.2025-26

# Under optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act

(4)
3,60,000
4,000
,000
6
3,5
# Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC

(3)
,000
3,60,000
4,000
,000
6
3,5
# Under which tax regime should Raj pay income-tax? Write your response here

|(2)|Gross Annual Value [Rent received is taken as GAV in the absence of other information]|
|---|---|
|Income from house property (in Bangalore)|Mr. Rahul|
|Less:|Municipal taxes paid|

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Page 12
|1,06,800|40,50,000|50,000|
|---|---|---|
| |2,00,000| |
|1,06,800|40,50,000| |
|3,00,000|40,50,000|2,00,000|
| | |50,000|

Net profit as per statement of profit

Profits and gains of business and not debited to statement of profit for research

to be set-off against PGBP; or loan allowable

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

housing to be carried forward for Income under this head

Deductions u/s 24 Additional depreciation

purchase of apartment Loss under this head

profession (PGBP) on Deductions to

due Contribution expenditure

30% of NAV Interest and loss and loss In-house research

Less: - - Page 13 Less:
# Computation of tax liability of Mr. Rahul for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|Tax on total income|
|---|---|
|Nil|1,00,000|
| |12,500|
|Under optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act| |
|10,00,000@20%|10,00,000[......................@30%]|
|5,00,000@5%| |
|Upto| |
|2,50,000 ≤| |
|2,50,000 ≤| |
|Nil|20,000|
|30,000|30,000|
|Under default tax regime as per section 115BAC| |
|Loss, if any, to be carried forward| |
|12,00,000@15%|10,00,000@10%|
| |,00,000@5%|
|Under Section 80JJAA| |
|Gross Total Income| |
|Under section 80C| |
|Deductions| |
|to A.Y.2026-27| |
|3,00,000|,00,000 ≤|
|3,00,000 ≤| |
|Total Income| |
|VI-A| |
|Less:|Page 14|
|Upto| |

# Tax liability of Rahul

|Higher of (1) and (2)|18.5% of income|
|---|---|
|Health and education cess@4%|–|
|Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)| |
|Total| |
|AMT liability (Rounded off)| |
|Tax liability (Rounded off)| |
|Deduction u/s 80JJAA| |
|Alternate Minimum Tax| |
|Tax liability (before cess)|Adjusted total income|
|Adjusted Total Income| |
|Total income as per the Act|Tax liability|
|AMT liability| |
|Compute| |
|Add:|(2)|
|60,000|Health and education cess@4%|
|15,00,000@20%|Total tax liability (Rounded off)|
|Total tax liability (before cess)|15,00,000 [……………….@30%]|
|Total tax liability|12,00,000 ≤|
|Add:| |

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Page 15
# Under which tax regime should Rahul pay income-tax?

Write your response here

Find the answers to the Scenario at the end of Module 2.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Page 16
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
# CHAPTER 9

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY - COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to–

- compute the tax liability of an individual under the default tax regime under section 115BAC;
- compute the tax liability of an individual as per the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
- examine the applicability of the provisions of Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT), if applicable and compute the tax liability applying such provisions and determine the tax credit, if any, to be carried forward;
- compare the tax liability computed under the default tax regime under section 115BAC with the tax liability under the regular provisions of the Act (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable) and determine which is more beneficial to the individual.
# 9.2 INCOME TAX LAW

# CHAPTER OVERVIEW

# COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

# Determination of residential status

# Classification of Income under 5 heads

Salaries
Income from house property
Profits and gains of business or profession
Capital gains
Income from other sources
Compute income under each head applying the charging & deeming provisions and providing for permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder.

Apply the clubbing provisions.

Set-off/carry forward and set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act.

Compute Gross Total Income (GTI).

Less: Deductions from Gross Total Income.

Total Income (TI).
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# 1. MEANING OF TOTAL INCOME

The total income of an individual is arrived at after making deductions under Chapter VI-A from the Gross Total Income. As we have learnt earlier, Gross Total Income is the aggregate of the income computed under the 5 heads of income, after giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry forward & set-off of losses.

# 2. INCOME TO BE CONSIDERED WHILE COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME OF INDIVIDUALS

|Capacity in which income is earned by an individual|Treatment of income earned in each capacity|
|---|---|
|(1) In his personal capacity (under the 5 heads of income)|Income from salaries, Income from house property, Profits and gains of business or profession, Capital gains and Income from other sources.|
|(2) As a partner of a firm/LLP|(i) Salary, bonus etc. received by a partner is taxable as his business income. (ii) Interest on capital and/or loans to the firm/LLP is taxable as business income of the partner. The income mentioned in (i) and (ii) above are taxable to the extent they are allowed as deduction to the firm. (iii) Share of profit in the firm is exempt in the hands of the partner [Section 10(2A)]. The profit credited to the partners’ accounts in the firm would be exempt from tax in the hands of such partners, even if the income chargeable to tax becomes Nil in the hands of the firm on account of any exemption or deduction available under the provisions of the Act [Circular No. 8/2014 dated 31.03.2014].|

# 9.4 INCOME TAX LAW

1. As a member of HUF
1. Share of income of HUF is exempt in the hands of the member [Section 10(2)].
2. Income from an impartible estate of HUF is taxable in the hands of the holder of the estate who is the eldest member of the HUF.
3. Income from self-acquired property converted into joint family property, without adequate consideration.
2. Income of other persons included in the income of the individual
1. Transferee’s income, where there is a transfer of income without transfer of assets.
2. Income arising to transferee from a revocable transfer of an asset.
3. In cases (i) and (ii), income is includible in the hands of the transferor.
4. Income of spouse as mentioned in section 64(1)(ii)/(iv).
5. Income from assets transferred otherwise than for adequate consideration to any person for the benefit of spouse [Section 64(1)(vii)].
6. Income from assets transferred otherwise than for adequate consideration to son’s wife or to any person for the benefit of son’s wife [Section 64(1)(vi)/(viii)].
7. Income of minor child as mentioned in section 64(1A).

# 3. COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME AND TAX PAYABLE BY AN INDIVIDUAL

Income-tax is levied on an assessee’s total income. Such total income has to be computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Steps 1 to 8 given hereunder have to be followed for computing total income of an individual assessee. Thereafter, steps 9 to 15 have to be followed for computing the tax payable.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# Step 1 – Determination of residential status

- The residential status of an individual has to be determined to ascertain which income is to be included in computing the total income.
- In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in India in the relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the earlier previous years, as the case may be, determine his residential status.
- An individual can be either a –
- - Resident and ordinarily resident
- Resident but not ordinarily resident
- Non-resident

An individual who is a citizen of India, having total income, other than the income from foreign sources, exceeding ` 15 lakh during the previous year, would be deemed resident in India in that previous year, if he is not liable to tax in any other country or territory by reason of his domicile or residence or any other criteria of similar nature. Such deemed resident would, by default, be a resident but not ordinarily resident in India in that previous year.
- The residential status of an individual determines the scope of his taxable income.
- For example, income which accrues outside India and is received outside India is taxable in the hands of a resident and ordinarily resident but is not taxable in the case of a non-resident. In the case of a resident but not ordinarily resident, such income would be taxable only if it is derived from a business controlled in India or profession set up in India.

# Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads

- An individual may earn income from different sources. Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of an individual assessee can be classified into five different heads of income.
- There are five heads of income, namely, -
# 9.6 INCOME TAX LAW

- Profits and gains of business or profession
- Capital Gains
- Income from other sources

The income of an assessee should be identified and grouped under the respective head of income.

Each head of income has a charging section (for example, section 15 for salaries, section 22 for income from house property).

Deeming provisions are also contained under certain heads, by which specific items are sought to be taxed under those heads. For example, unrealized rent and arrears of rent from house property would be deemed to be income from house property in the hands of the recipient individual even if he is not the owner of the house property at the time of receipt of such amount.

The charging section and the deeming provisions would help you to determine the scope of income chargeable under a particular head.

# Step 3 – Computation of income under each head

Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a particular head of income.

Assess the income under each head by -

- applying the charging and deeming provisions,
- excluding items of income relating to that head in respect of which specific exemptions are provided in section 10.

There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax. These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part of Gross Total Income. For e.g. agricultural income which is exempt under both the tax regimes.

Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax. These incomes are excluded while computing income under the relevant head only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. For e.g. House Rent Allowance, Children Education Allowance are exempt upto prescribed limits under the optional tax regime as per normal provisions.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

of the Act. However, there is no exemption for these allowances under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

- allowing the permissible deductions under that head, and

For example, while calculating income from house property of a rented house property, municipal taxes paid by the owner and interest on loan are allowed as deduction. Standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 (under optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default regime) is allowed under salaries. Similarly, deductions and allowances are prescribed under other heads of income.

- disallowing the non-permissible deductions.

For example, while computing income under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession” expenditure of personal nature and expenditure which is in the nature of offence are not allowable as deduction. Hence, such expenditure, if any, debited to profits and loss account, has to be added back while computing income under this head.

Likewise, while computing net consideration for capital gains, brokerage is a permissible deduction from gross sale consideration but securities transaction tax paid is not permissible.

In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax under the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under the normal provisions of the Act are not permissible under the default tax regime, for example, additional depreciation, investment linked tax deduction under section 35AD, contribution to scientific research association, national laboratory, IIT etc. However, expenditure on in-house scientific research related to the business of the assessee is allowable as deduction under both the tax regimes.

# Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.

An individual in a higher tax bracket may have a tendency to divert his income to another person who is not subject to tax or who is in a lower tax bracket.
# 9.8 INCOME TAX LAW

For example, an individual may make a fixed deposit in the name of his minor son, so that income from such deposit would accrue to his son, who does not have any other income.

In order to prevent evasion of income-tax by such means, clubbing provisions have been incorporated in the Income-tax Act, 1961, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse, son’s wife etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted his income to such persons for the purpose of computing tax liability.

Further, income of a minor child, not being a minor child suffering from any disability of the nature specified in section 80U (other than income derived from exercise of special skills/talent or manual work done by him) is includible in the hands of the parent whose total income is higher before including minor’s income. Such income will be included in the hands of the parent and if that parent has exercised the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, exemption of up to ` 1,500 under section 10(32) would be provided from that income.

# Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses

An individual may have different sources of income under the same head of income. He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. Similarly, he can have loss under one head of income and profits under another head of income. There are provisions in the Act for allowing inter-source and inter-head adjustment.

# Inter-source set-off of losses

A person may have income from one source and loss from another source under the same head of income. For instance, a person may have profit from wholesale trade of merchandise and loss from the business of plying vehicles.

The loss of one business can be set-off against the profits of another business to arrive at the net income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. However, loss from speculation business can be set-off only against profits from speculation business and not any other business.

Set-off of loss from one source against income from another source within the same head of income is permissible, subject to certain
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

exceptions, like long-term capital loss cannot be set-off against short-term capital gains though short-term capital loss can be set-off against long-term capital gains.

# Inter-head set-off of losses

- Likewise, set-off of loss from one head against income from another head is also permissible, subject to certain exceptions, like business loss cannot be set-off against salary income; loss under the head “Capital Gains” cannot be set-off against any other head of income.
- Loss from house property cannot be set-off against any other head of income, if the individual pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
- If the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, loss from house property can be set-off against income under any other head only to the extent of ` 2 lakhs. The remaining loss from house property has to be carried forward to the subsequent year to be set-off against income from house property in that year.

# Carry forward and set-off of losses

- Unabsorbed losses of the current year can be carried forward to the next year for set-off only against the respective head of income.
- Here again, if there are any restrictions relating to inter-source set-off, the same will apply, like long-term capital loss which is carried forward can be set-off only against long-term capital gains and not short-term capital gains of a later year.
- The maximum number of years up to which any particular loss can be carried forward is also provided under the Act.
- For example, business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of 8 assessment years to be set-off against business income. However, loss from specified business referred to in section 35AD can be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of any specified business.
# 9.10 INCOME TAX LAW

It must be noted that loss from an exempt source cannot be set-off against profits from a taxable source of income.

Example: Share of loss from a partnership firm cannot be set-off against sole proprietary business income of the partner, since share of income of the firm is exempt under section 10(2A).

# Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income

- The income computed under each head, after giving effect to the clubbing provisions and provisions for set-off and carry forward and set-off of losses, have to be aggregated to arrive at the gross total income.
- The process of computing GTI is depicted hereunder -

Add income computed under each head
Apply clubbing provisions
Apply the provisions for set-off and carry forward of losses

# Step 7 – Deductions from Gross Total Income

Certain deductions are allowable from gross total income to arrive at the total income. These deductions are contained in Chapter VI-A. These deductions are allowable if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act, subject to satisfaction of the conditions prescribed in the relevant sections.

- Deduction in respect of certain payments, for example,

|Section|Nature of Payment/Deposit|
|---|---|
|80C|Payment of life insurance premium, tuition fees of children, deposit in public provident fund, repayment of housing loan etc.|
|80D|Medical insurance premium paid by an individual/HUF for the specified persons/ contribution to CGHS etc.|
|80E|Payment of interest on educational loan taken for self or relative|

- Deduction in respect of certain incomes, for example,

|Section|Nature of Income|
|---|---|
|80QQB|Royalty income of authors of certain books other than text books|
|80RRB|Royalty on patents|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# ♦ Deduction in respect of other incomes

|Section|Nature of Income|
|---|---|
|80TTA|Interest on savings account with a bank, co-operative society and post office.|
|80TTB|Interest on deposit with a bank, co-operative society and post office in case of senior citizens|

# ♦ Other Deductions

Deduction under section 80U in case of a person with disability.

In addition, deduction is also allowable under section 10AA in respect of an assessee who derives profits and gains from an undertaking which manufactures or produces articles or things or provides any service in any SEZ on or before 31.3.2021 if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act.

There are limits in respect of deduction under certain sections. The payments/incomes are allowable as deduction subject to such limits. For example, the maximum deduction under section 80RRB is ` 3 lakhs; under section 80TTA is ` 10,000 and under section 80TTB is ` 50,000.

Note - Deduction under section 80CCD(2) [Employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government], section 80CCH(2) [Central Government’s contribution to assessee’s account in Agniveer Corpus Fund] and section 80JJAA would be available if the eligible assessee pays tax at concessional rates of tax u/s 115BAC under the default tax regime.

# Step 8 – Computation of Total income

♦ The gross total income as reduced by the above deductions under Chapter VI-A and section 10AA is the total income.

Total income = GTI – Deductions under Chapter VI-A and section 10AA

♦ It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10.

♦ Tax is calculated on the total income of the assessee.
# 9.12 INCOME TAX LAW

# Step 9 – Application of the rates of tax on the total income in case of an individual

♦ Concessional tax rates under default tax regime under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961

For individuals, there is a slab rate and basic exemption limit. At present, the basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 under the default tax regime. The rates of tax and level of total income are as under –

|Total income (in `)|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|(i) Upto ` 3,00,000|NIL|
|(ii) From ` 3,00,001 to ` 7,00,000|5%|
|(iii) From ` 7,00,001 to ` 10,00,000|10%|
|(iv) From ` 10,00,001 to ` 12,00,000|15%|
|(v) From ` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000|20%|
|(vi) Above ` 15,00,000|30%|

♦ Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax regime (regular provisions of the Act)

The slab rates for A.Y. 2025-26 applicable to Individual under normal provisions of the Act are as follows:

|Total income (in `)|Rate of Tax|
|---|---|
|(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years)|Nil|
|(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or above but less than 80 years and resident in India)| |
|(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years and resident in India)| |
|` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in 5% cases (i) and (ii) above, respectively]| |
|` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000|20%|
|Above ` 10,00,000|30%|

♦ The rates of tax have to be applied on the total income to compute the tax liability.

♦ Rates of tax in respect of certain incomes are provided under the Income-tax Act, 1961 itself. Slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

in respect of such incomes. For instance, the rates of tax for long term capital gains on certain assets, long term capital gain on other assets, certain short term capital gains, winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races and winnings from online games etc. are prescribed in sections 112A, 112, 111A, 115BB and 115BBJ, respectively.

- The special rates of tax have to be applied on the respective component of total income and the general slab rates have to be applied on the balance of total income as per the tax regime in which he pays tax.
- The unexhausted basic exemption limit can, however, be adjusted against long-term capital gains taxable under section 112/112A and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A in case of resident individual in both the tax regime.

# Step 10 – Surcharge/ Rebate under section 87A

Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax.

In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2025-26, in case the individual assessee pays tax under default regime under section 115BAC, are as follows:

|Particulars|Rate of surcharge on income-tax|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|10%|
|(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1 crore but ≤ ` 2 crore|15%|
|(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore|25%|
|The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income|Not exceeding 15%|

# 9.14 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) Where total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered under (iii) above

In case the assessee exercises the option to shift out of the default regime

The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2025-26, in case the individual assessee exercises the option to shift out of the default regime, are as follows:

|Particulars|Rate of surcharge on income-tax|
|---|---|
|(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore|10%|
|(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1 crore but ≤ ` 2 crore|15%|
|(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore but ≤ ` 5 crore|25%|
|The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income|Not exceeding 15%|
|(iv) Where total income (excluding dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 5 crore|37%|
|The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income|Not exceeding 15%|
|(v) Where total income (including dividend income and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered under (iii) and (iv) above|15%|

Marginal relief would also be available under both the tax regimes to ensure that the increase in amount of tax payable (including surcharge) due to increase in total income of an assessee beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the amount of increase in total income.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# Rebate under section 87A:

Section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an individual resident in India.

# Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default regime u/s 115BAC

(i) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under section 115BAC and the total income of such individual does not exceed ` 7,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 25,000, whichever is less.

(ii) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under section 115BAC and the total income of such individual exceeds ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of ` 7,00,000, the rebate would be as follows.

Step 1 – Total income (-) ` 7 lakhs (A)

Step 2 - Compute income-tax payable on total income (B)

Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B – A.

# Rebate to resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act)

If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 5,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on the total income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 12,500, whichever is less.

However, rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax payable on long-term capital gains taxable under section 112A.

# Step 11 – Health and Education cess (HEC) on Income-tax

The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable, should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the “Health and Education cess on income-tax”, calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax and surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of all assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOP/BOI, firms, local authorities, co-operative societies and companies.

It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary and higher education.
# 9.16 INCOME TAX LAW

Total Tax = Tax on total income at applicable rates (+) Surcharge, at applicable rates, if total income > ` 50 lakhs, or (-) Rebate u/s 87A

# Step 12 – Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)

The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains profit-linked and investment-linked deductions in order to encourage investment in various industries and infrastructure facilities. Taxpayers who exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC and are eligible to claim such deductions end up paying no income-tax or marginal income-tax though they are capable of paying higher taxes. It has to be kept in mind that our Government also needs regular/consistent inflow of tax, which is one of its major source of revenue, to fund various expenses for the welfare of the country. Hence, in order to ensure payment of reasonable tax by such zero-tax paying/marginal-tax paying entities, the concept of alternate minimum tax has been introduced in the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Chapter XII-BA contains special provisions for levy of alternate minimum tax in case of persons other than a company¹. Any person other than a company, who has claimed deduction under any section (other than section 80P) included in Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or under section 10AA or investment-linked deduction under section 35AD would be subject to AMT [Section 115JEE(1)].

The provisions of AMT would, however, not be applicable to an individual, HUF, AOPs, BOIs, whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person, if the adjusted total income of such person does not exceed ` 20 lakh [Section 115JEE(2)].

Individual/ HUF/ AoP/ BoI and artificial juridical person, paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, are also not liable to alternate minimum tax under section 115JC.

¹ Since in respect of companies, minimum alternate tax (MAT) provisions are applicable, which will be dealt with at the Final level.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Note - At intermediate level, since profit-linked deductions provided under section 80-IA to 80-IE, section 80JJA, 80LA, 80M, 80P and 80PA have been excluded from the scope of syllabus by way of Study Guidelines and computation of total income and tax liability is restricted to individual assessees only, the discussion in relation to AMT in this chapter is limited with respect to deduction under section 10AA, section 35AD and deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB only.

Accordingly, where the regular income-tax payable by a person for a previous year computed as per the normal provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is less than the AMT payable for such previous year, the adjusted total income shall be deemed to be the total income of the person. Such person shall be liable to pay income-tax on the adjusted total income @18.5% plus surcharge, if applicable, and HEC @4% [Section 115JC].

“Adjusted total income” would mean the total income before giving effect to Chapter XII-BA as increased by

1. the deductions claimed, if any, under section 10AA;
2. the deduction claimed under section 35AD, as reduced by the depreciation allowable under section 32, as if no deduction under section 35AD was allowed in respect of the asset for which such deduction is claimed; and
3. deduction under any section included in Chapter VI-A under the heading C-Deductions in respect of certain incomes [For Intermediate level, the relevant sections are 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB].

# Tax credit for AMT [Section 115JD]

Tax credit is the excess of AMT paid over the regular income-tax payable under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the year. Such tax credit shall be carried forward and set-off against income-tax payable in the later year to the extent of excess of regular income-tax payable under normal the provisions of the Act over the AMT payable in that year. The balance tax credit, if any, shall be carried forward to the next year for set-off in that year in a similar manner.

AMT credit can be carried forward for set-off upto a maximum period of 15 assessment years succeeding the assessment year in which the credit becomes allowable.
# 9.18 INCOME TAX LAW

Tax Credit allowable even if Adjusted Total Income does not exceed ` 20 lakh in the year of set-off [Section 115JEE(3)]

In case where the assessee has not claimed any deduction under section 10AA or section 35AD or deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB in any previous year and the adjusted total income of that year does not exceed ` 20 lakh, it would still be entitled to set-off his brought forward AMT credit in that year.

Tax credit not allowable to the assessee paying tax under the default tax regime

A person who is paying tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC would not be eligible to claim AMT credit.

# Step 13 – Examine whether to pay tax under default regime under section 115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions of the Act

# In case of an assessee not having income from business or profession:

In case of individuals not having income from business or profession, the total income and tax liability may be computed every year, both in accordance with default tax regime under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which is more beneficial and accordingly, decide whether or not to shift out of the default regime under section 115BAC.

In effect, such individual can choose whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out in each previous year. He may choose to pay tax under default regime under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default tax regime in another year.

# In case of an assessee having income from business or profession:

In case of individuals having income from business or profession, the total income and tax liability may be computed, both in accordance with default tax regime under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which is more beneficial.

Such individual has an option to shift out/opt out of the default tax regime under this section and the option has to be exercised on or before the due date specified under section 139(1) for furnishing the return of income for such previous year and once such option is exercised, it would apply to subsequent assessment years.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only once and pay tax under the default regime under section 115BAC for a previous year other than the year in which it was exercised. Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this section, except where such person ceases to have any business income.

# Step 14 – Credit for advance tax, TDS and TCS

- Tax is deductible at source at the time of payment of salary, rent, interest, fees for professional services, royalty etc.
- The payer has to deduct tax at source at the rates specified in the respective sections.
- Such tax deducted at source has to be reduced by the payee to determine his net tax liability.
- Tax is collectible by the seller in case of certain goods at the rate specified in the respective section. Credit of such tax collection at source is allowable to determine the tax liability.
- The Income-tax Act, 1961 also requires payment of advance tax in instalments during the previous year itself on the basis of estimated income, if the tax payable, after reducing TDS/TCS, is ` 10,000 or more.
- An individual is required to pay advance tax in four instalments, on or before 15ᵗʰ June, 15ᵗʰ September, 15ᵗʰ December and 15th March of the financial year.
- Assessees declaring profits under presumptive taxation provisions under section 44AD or under section 44ADA can, however, pay the entire advance tax on or before 15ᵗʰ March of the financial year.
- From the total tax due, deduct the TDS, TCS and advance tax paid for the relevant assessment year to arrive at the tax payable.

Tax Payable = Total tax liability – TDS – TCS - Advance tax paid

# Step 15 - Tax Payable/ Tax Refundable

After adjusting the advance tax, tax deducted and collected at source, the assessee would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such amount should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10. The assessee has to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) before or at the
# 9.20 INCOME TAX LAW

time of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee will get the same after filing the return of income.

Note: Students are advised to read the above steps carefully and follow the given procedure while solving problems on computation of total income and tax liability.

# 4. TAX PLANNING IN RESPECT OF SALARY INCOME

The definition of salary is very wide and includes not only monetary salary but also benefits and perquisites in kind. Under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, the only deduction available under section 16 in respect of salary income is the standard deduction of upto ` 75,000. However, under the optional tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act, the deductions available under section 16 in respect of salary income are the standard deduction upto ` 50,000, deduction for entertainment allowance (only for government employees) and deduction for professional tax. The following are some of the aspects which can be considered for tax planning in regard to salary income -

1. Salary Structure: An employer may plan the salary structure of employees keeping in view the deductions and exemptions available under the Act. If salary is paid as a consolidated amount, without any break-up, the amount of salary after providing standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 (under optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default regime), would become taxable without any further exemption and deduction. Therefore, the employer may structure the salary by including various allowances and perquisites in addition to basic salary, so as to enable the employee to optimise his tax liability.

For example, the employer may include allowances as part of the salary structure of the employees for which exemption can be claimed under Rule 2BB if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, e.g. Children education allowance, hostel allowance, house rent allowance. The employer will get a deduction of all the above amounts paid while computing his profits and gains of business or profession.

Further, if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, the employer can give such allowances like special compensatory allowance, border area allowance or remote area allowance or difficult area allowance or disturbed area allowance depending upon the place of posting of the employee. Some exemptions are available in respect of these.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

allowances. In this connection, Rule 2BB specifies the exempt allowances. The employer has to make a careful study and fix the salary structure in such a manner that it will include allowances which are exempt.

# (2) Employees’ welfare schemes:

There are several employees’ welfare schemes such as recognised provident fund, approved superannuation fund, gratuity fund. Payments received from such funds by the employees are totally exempt or exempt up to significant amounts. For example, gratuity received by an employee covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is exempt up to ` 20 lakh. The provident fund received by the employee from recognised provident fund is exempt, subject to limits and conditions. The employer can institute such welfare schemes for the benefit of the employees. Such amount contributed by the employer towards the above funds is deductible. However, a note of caution is necessary here in view of the restrictive provisions of section 40A(9) which disallows any contribution made to any welfare funds except where such contributions are covered by section 36(1)(iv)/(iva)/(v) or as required by or under any other law for the time being in force. Further, the employer can contribute to recognized provident fund account of the employee up to 12% of salary, and the same would not be taxable in the hands of the employees. The amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made in a recognised provident fund, in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1) and in an approved superannuation fund by the employer to the account of the assessee, to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000, would be taxable as perquisite in the hands of the employee. Likewise, if an employee’s contribution to RPF exceeds ` 2,50,000 p.a. or ` 5,00,000 p.a. (on or after 1.4.2021), as the case may be, depending on whether the employer contributes to RPF, then, interest accrued on the amount exceeding the specified threshold would be taxable. The detailed provisions have been dealt with in Unit 1 of Chapter 3.

# (3) Insurance policies:

Any payment made by an employer on behalf of an employee to maintain a life policy will be treated as perquisite in the hands of the employee. Further, payments received from the employer in respect of key man insurance policies constitute income in the hands of the employees. However, any sum reimbursed by the employer in respect of any mediclaim premium paid by the employee to keep in force an insurance on his health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme.
# 9.22 INCOME TAX LAW

approved by the Central Government or IRDA for the purpose of section 80D is not a perquisite in the hands of the employee. Further, the payment of premium by the employer on behalf of the employee will not be treated as a perquisite in the case of accident insurance policies. This is due to the fact that the employer has a vested interest in the safety of the life of his employee who is engaged in such dangerous occupations.2

In respect of accident insurance policies, the term perquisite applies to only such sums in regard to which there was an obligation on the part of the employer to pay and a vested right on the part of the employee. If the employee has no vested interest in the policy, it cannot be considered as a perquisite. In cases where an employer takes out accident insurance policy covering all workmen and staff members and pays insurance premium and whenever any worker/staff member meets with an accident and the amount of claim is received from the insurance company and the same is paid away by the employer to the said worker or his family members, the premium paid by the employer in respect of group accident policies could not be considered as a perquisite, under section 17 to be added in the salary income.3 The amount received from insurance company on accident or death by employee or his dependents will not also be in the nature of income but a capital receipt and therefore the same will not be taxable.

(4) Dearness allowance, dearness pay: The employer should ensure that dearness allowance and dearness pay should form part of “salary”. This is because certain items like employer’s contribution to the recognised provident fund, commuted pension etc. are calculated on the basis of salary. Therefore, if dearness allowance, dearness pay etc. are included in salary, the above benefits will also increase leading to higher terminal benefits in the hands of the employee. Also, for determining the exemption in respect of employer’s contribution to provident fund, house rent allowance etc., dearness allowance forming part of pay for retirement benefits is included within the meaning of “Salary”.

2CIT v Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Del) and CIT v Vinay Bharat Ram (1981) 129 ITR 128 (Del)

3CIT v. Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Delhi)
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

1. Leave travel facility: If the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, the employer should avail leave travel facility. Under section 10(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, exemption is provided in the hands of the employee in respect of leave travel concession. Such exemption is available for the employee, spouse, children (up to a maximum of 2 children), dependent parents, dependent brothers and dependent sisters. However, if the employee pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, exemption under section 10(5) would not be available.
2. Rent free accommodation / House Rent Allowance (HRA): An employee should analyse the tax incidence of a perquisite and an allowance, whenever he is given an option, in order to choose the one which is more beneficial to him. In the case of Rent Free Accommodation vs. HRA, it must be noted that the perquisite of rent free accommodation is taxed as per Rule 3(1) of the Income-tax Rules, 1962 and HRA is exempt to the extent mentioned in section 10(13A) read with Rule 2A. However, exemption for HRA would be available only if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime. The employee should therefore work out his tax liability and net cash flow under both the options and then, decide on whether to receive HRA or choose a rent free accommodation.
3. Uncommuted/Commuted pension: Uncommuted pension is fully taxable. Therefore, the employees should get their pension commuted. Commuted pension is fully exempt from tax in the case of government employees and partly exempt from tax in the case of non-government employees.
4. Provident Fund: Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participating in a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be exempt, where an employee who is a member of a recognised provident fund and who resigns after completing five years of continuous service. However, if he resigns before completing five years of continuous service he should ensure that he joins an organisation which maintains a recognised provident fund. The accumulated balance of the provident fund with the previous employer will be exempt from tax provided the same is transferred to the new employer who also maintains a recognised provident fund.
# 9.24 INCOME TAX LAW

It may be noted the exemption would not be available in respect of income by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by the employee exceeding ` 2,50,000/` 5,00,000, as the case may be, in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1st April, 2021 and computed in prescribed manner.

# (9) Other retirement benefits:

Incidence of tax on retirement benefits like leave encashment, commuted pension, accumulated balance of unrecognized provident fund is lower if they are paid in the beginning of the financial year. The employer and the employees may mutually plan in such a way that retirement takes place in the beginning of a financial year.

# (10) Tax free perquisites:

The following are the perquisites which are exempt from tax–

- (i) Use of computers and laptop by employee;
- (ii) Medical facility in employer’s own hospital or a public hospital or Government or other approved hospital;
- (iii) Educational benefit in a school run by employer provided value of benefit does not exceed ` 1,000 per month per child.

# (11) Considerations for salary structuring:

The perquisite valuation rules prescribe the method for valuing the various perquisites provided by the employer to his employees on the basis of the cost of such perquisites to the employee. For a detailed study, students are advised to refer to the Unit 1 of Chapter 3 - ‘Salaries’. Accordingly, the entire salary structuring for employees will have to be done after carefully weighing the pros and cons of paying salary in monetary terms or allowing the benefit of perquisites in kind to the employees.

It may be noted that a salaried person has an option to choose whether to pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act in each previous year.

Under section 115BAC, in respect of his total income, he cannot not avail certain exemptions/deductions like Leave Travel Concession, HRA, exemption under section 10(14) (other than those allowable under this section), interest on housing loan on self-occupied property, deductions under Chapter VI-A [other than under section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and section 80JJAA] etc.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Exemptions allowable under section 10(14) under the default tax regime under section 115BAC include travelling allowance, daily allowance, conveyance allowance and transport allowance to blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee.

Therefore, a salaried taxpayer not availing the above deductions/exemptions or availing a lesser amount of such deductions/exemptions can analyse his tax liability under default tax regime under section 115BAC vis-à-vis the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in each year. An employee intending to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC has to intimate the same to the employer.

# ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. A, aged 32 years, is employed with XYZ (P) Ltd. on a basic salary of ` 50,000 p.m. He has received transport allowance of ` 15,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of ` 20,000 p.m. from the company for the P.Y. 2024-25. He has paid rent of ` 25,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Delhi. Mr. A has paid interest of ` 2,10,000 for housing loan taken for the construction of his house in Mumbai. The construction of the house is completed in March, 2025 and his parents live in that house.

# Other Information

- Contribution to PPF - ` 1,50,000
- Contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD - ` 50,000
- Payment of medical insurance premium for father, who is of the age of 65 - ` 55,000
- Payment of medical insurance premium for self and spouse - ` 32,000

Compute the total income and tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26 in the most beneficial manner.

# SOLUTION

# Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Salaries| |
|Basic Salary [` 50,000 x 12]|6,00,000|
|Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12]|1,80,000|

# 9.26 INCOME TAX LAW

|HRA received [` 20,000 x 12]|2,40,000| |
|---|---|---|
|Gross salary|10,20,000| |
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|(75,000)| |
| |9,45,000| |
|Income from house property|Interest on housing loan|-|
|Gross Total Income|9,45,000| |
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI- A| | |
|Section 80C|Contribution in PPF|-|
|Section 80CCD|Contribution to pension scheme|-|
|Section 80D|Mediclaim insurance premium for self and parents|-|
|Total Income|9,45,000| |

# Tax liability

|Tax @5% on ` 4,00,000 [` 7,00,000 - ` 3,00,000]|20,000|
|---|---|
|Tax @10% on ` 2,45,000 [` 9,45,000 - ` 7,00,000]|24,500|
| |44,500|
|Add: Health & Education cess @ 4%|1,780|
|Total Tax Liability|46,280|

# Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

| |Particulars|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries| | |
|Basic Salary [` 50,000 x 12]| |6,00,000|
|Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12]| |1,80,000|
|HRA received| |2,40,000|
|Less: Least of the following exempt u/s 10(13A)|2,40,000|-|
|HRA Received| |2,40,000|
| |Actual rent paid – 10% of salary [` 3,00,000 – ` 60,000]|2,40,000|
|50% of salary| |3,00,000|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|Gross salary| | | |7,80,000|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)| | | |(50,000)|
| | | | |7,30,000|
|Income from house property| | | | |
|[Annual Value is Nil. Deduction u/s 24(b) for interest on housing loan would be restricted to ` 2,00,000, in case of self-occupied property, which would represent loss from house property]| | | |(2,00,000)|
|Gross Total Income| | | |5,30,000|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A| | | | |
|Section 80C|Contribution to PPF| | |1,50,000|
|Section 80CCD(1B)|Own contribution to pension scheme| | |50,000|
|Section 80D|Mediclaim insurance premium| | | |
|For self and spouse, restricted to| | |25,000| |
| |For father, who is a senior citizen, restricted to| |50,000| |
| | | | |75,000|
|Total Income| | | |2,55,000|
|Tax liability| | | | |
| |Tax @ 5% on ` 5,000 [` 2,55,000 - ` 2,50,000]| | |250|
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A| | | |250|
|Total Tax Liability| | | |-|

Since tax liability as per the normal provisions of the Act is lower than the tax liability under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for A.Y. 2025-26.

Note: In this case, Mr. A is entitled to exemption u/s 10(13A), benefit of interest on housing loan in respect of self-occupied property and Chapter VI-A deductions, owing to which his total income is reduced by ` 6,90,000. His total income under the regular provisions of the Act is less than ` 5,00,000, owing to which he becomes entitled to rebate u/s 87A. Hence, in this case, it is beneficial.
# 9.28 INCOME TAX LAW

for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for A.Y. 2025-26.

# ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. Kadam is entitled to a salary of ` 41,000 per month. He is given an option by his employer either to take house rent allowance or a rent free accommodation which is owned by the company. The HRA amount payable was ` 7,000 per month. The rent for the hired accommodation was ` 6,000 per month at New Delhi. Advice Mr. Kadam whether it would be beneficial for him to avail HRA or Rent Free Accommodation. Give your advice on the basis of “Net Take Home Cash benefits”. Assume Mr. Kadam exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# SOLUTION

Computation of tax liability of Kadam under both the options

|Particulars|Option I – HRA (`)|Option II – RFA (`)|
|---|---|---|
|Basic Salary (` 41,000 x 12 Months)|4,92,000|4,92,000|
|Perquisite value of rent-free accommodation (10% of ` 4,92,000)|N.A.|49,200|
|House rent Allowance (` 7,000 x 12 Months)|84,000| |
|Less: Exempt u/s 10(13A) – least of the following -| | |
|- 50% of Basic Salary|2,46,000| |
|- Actual HRA received|84,000| |
|- Rent paid less 10% of salary|22,800|22,800|
|Gross Salary|5,53,200|5,41,200|
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|50,000|50,000|
|Net Salary|5,03,200|4,91,200|
|Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A|-|-|
|Total Income|5,03,200|4,91,200|
|Tax on total income|13,140|12,060|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|Less: Rebate under section 87A - Lower of ` 12,500 or income-tax of ` 12,060, since total income does not exceed ` 5,00,000|Nil|12,060|
|---|---|---|
| |13,140|Nil|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|526|Nil|
|Tax liability|13,666|Nil|
|Tax liability (Rounded off)|13,670|Nil|

# Cash Flow Statement

|Particulars|Option I – HRA|Option II – RFA|
|---|---|---|
|Inflow: Salary|5,76,000|4,92,000|
|Less: Outflow: Rent paid|(72,000)|-|
|Tax on total income|(13,670)|Nil|
|Net Inflow|4,90,330|4,92,000|

Since the net cash inflow under option II (RFA) is higher than in Option I (HRA), it is beneficial for Mr. Kadam to avail Option II, i.e., Rent Free Accommodation.
# 9.30 INCOME TAX LAW

# TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Compute the tax liability of Mr. Gupta (aged 61) under default tax regime, having total income of ` 1,02,00,000 for the A.Y.2025-26. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, income from house property and interest on fixed deposit.
2. Miss Charlie, an American national, got married to Mr. Radhey of India in USA on 02.03.2024 and came to India for the first time on 16.03.2024. She left for USA on 19.9.2024. She returned to India again on 27.03.2025. While in India, she had purchased a show room in Mumbai on 30.04.2024, which was leased out to a company on a rent of ` 25,000 p.m. from 01.05.2024. She had taken loan from a bank for purchase of this show room on which bank had charged interest of ` 97,500 upto 31.03.2025. She had received the following cash gifts from her relatives and friends during 1.4.2024 to 31.3.2025:
- From parents of husband ` 51,000
- From married sister of husband ` 11,000
- From two very close friends of her husband (` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000)

Determine her residential status and compute the total income chargeable to tax along with the amount of tax liability on such income for the A.Y. 2025-26 if she opts out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
3. Would her residential status undergo any change, assuming that she is a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian sources is ` 18,00,000 and she is not liable to tax in USA?

Dr. Niranjana, a resident individual, aged 60 years is running a clinic in Surat. Her Income and Expenditure Account for the year ending March 31st, 2025 is as under:
|Expenditure|`|Income|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|To Medicine consumed|35,38,400|By Consultation and medical charges|58,85,850|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|To Staff salary|13,80,000|
|---|---|
|By Income-tax refund|5,450|
| |(principal ` 5,000, interest ` 450)|
|To Clinic consumables|1,10,000|
|By Dividend from units of UTI (Gross)|10,500|
|To Rent paid|90,000|
|By Winning from game show on T.V. (net of TDS of ` 15,000)|35,000|
|To Administrative expenses|2,55,000|
|By Rent|27,000|
|To Amount paid to scientific research association approved u/s 35|1,50,000|
|To Net profit|4,40,400|
| |59,63,800|
| |59,63,800|

(i) Rent paid includes ` 30,000 paid by cheque towards rent for her residential house in Surat.

(ii) Clinic equipments are:

1.4.2024 Opening W.D.V. - ` 5,00,000

7.12.2024 Acquired (cost) by cheque - ` 2,00,000

(iii) Rent received relates to residential house property situated at Surat. Gross Annual Value ` 27,000. The municipal tax of ` 2,000, paid in December, 2024, has been included in "administrative expenses".

(iv) She received salary of ` 7,500 p.m. from "Full Cure Hospital" which has not been included in the "consultation and medical charges".

(v) Dr. Niranjana availed a loan of ` 5,50,000 from a bank for higher education of her daughter. She repaid principal of ` 1,00,000, and interest thereon ` 55,000 during the previous year 2024-25.

(vi) She paid ` 1,00,000 as tuition fee (not in the nature of development fees/ donation) to the university for full time education of her daughter.
# 9.32 INCOME TAX LAW

(vii) An amount of ` 28,000 has also been paid by cheque on 27ᵗʰ March, 2025 for her medical insurance premium.

From the above, compute the total income of Dr. Smt. Niranjana for the A.Y. 2025-26 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.

# 4. Ms. Purvi, aged 55 years, is a Chartered Accountant in practice.

She maintains her accounts on cash basis. Her Income and Expenditure account for the year ended March 31, 2025 reads as follows:

|Expenditure|(`)|Income|(`)|(`)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Salary to staff|15,50,000|Fees earned:| | |
|Stipend to articled Assistants|1,37,000|Audit|27,88,000| |
| | |Taxation services|15,40,300| |
| | |Consultancy|12,70,000|55,98,300|
|Incentive to articled Assistants|13,000|Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian company (Gross)|10,524| |
|Office rent|12,24,000|Income from UTI (Gross)|7,600| |
|Printing and stationery|12,22,000|Honorarium received from various institutions for valuation of answer papers|15,800| |
|Meeting, seminar and conference|31,600|Rent received from residential flat let out|85,600| |
|Purchase of car (for official use)|80,000| | | |
|Repair, maintenance and petrol of car|4,000| | | |

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|Travelling expenses|5,25,000|
|---|---|
|Municipal tax paid in respect of house property|3,000|
|Net Profit|9,28,224|
|57,17,824|57,17,824|
|57,17,824|57,17,824|

# Other Information:

1. Allowable rate of depreciation on motor car is 15%.
2. Value of benefits received from clients during the course of profession is ` 10,500.
3. Incentives to articled assistants represent amount paid to two articled assistants for passing CA Intermediate Examination at first attempt.
4. Repairs and maintenance of car include ` 2,000 for the period from 1-10-2024 to 30-09-2025.
5. Salary includes ` 30,000 to a computer specialist in cash for assisting Ms. Purvi in one professional assignment.
6. The travelling expenses include expenditure incurred on foreign tour of ` 32,000 which was within the RBI norms.
7. Medical Insurance Premium on the health of dependent brother and major son dependent on her amounts to ` 5,000 and ` 10,000, respectively, paid in cash.
8. She invested an amount of ` 10,000 in National Saving Certificate.
9. She has paid ` 70,000 towards advance tax during the P.Y. 2024-25.

Compute the total income and tax payable by Ms. Purvi for the A.Y. 2025-26 in a most beneficial manner.

# Mr. Y's Business Analysis

Mr. Y carries on his own business. An analysis of his trading and profit & loss for the year ended 31-3-2025 revealed the following information:

1. The net profit was ` 11,20,000.
2. The following incomes were credited in the profit and loss account:
# 9.34 INCOME TAX LAW

1. Income from UTI ` 22,000 (Gross)
2. Interest on debentures ` 17,500 (Gross)
3. Winnings from horse races ` 15,000 (Gross)

(3) It was found that some stocks were omitted to be included in both the opening and closing stocks, the value of which were:

|Opening stock|` 8,000|
|---|---|
|Closing stock|` 12,000|

(4) ` 1,00,000 was debited in the profit and loss account, being contribution to a University approved and notified under section 35(1)(ii).

(5) Salary includes ` 20,000 paid to his brother which is unreasonable to the extent of ` 2,500.

(6) Advertisement expenses include 15 gift packets of dry fruits costing ` 1,000 per packet presented to important customers.

(7) Total expenses on car was ` 78,000. The car was used both for business and personal purposes. ¾ᵗʰ is for business purposes.

(8) Miscellaneous expenses included ` 30,000 paid to A & Co., a goods transport operator in cash on 31-1-2025 for distribution of the company’s product to the warehouses.

(9) Depreciation debited in the books was ` 55,000. Depreciation allowed as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 was ` 50,000.

(10) Drawings of ` 10,000 debited in the books.

(11) Investment in NSC ` 15,000 debited in the books.

Compute the total income of Mr. Y for the assessment year 2025-26 under optional tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act.

# 6. Balamurugan furnishes the following information for the year ended 31-03-2025:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from textile business|(1,35,000)|
|Income from house property|(15,000)|
|Lottery winning (Gross)|5,00,000|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Speculation business income: 1,00,000

Income by way of salary (Computed): 2,70,000

Long term capital gain u/s 112 taxable @20%: 70,000

Compute his total income, tax liability and advance tax obligations under default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# 7. Mr. Rajiv

Aged 50 years, a resident individual and practicing Chartered Accountant, furnishes you the receipts and payments account for the financial year 2024-25.

# Receipts and Payments Account

|Receipts|`|Payments|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|Opening balance (1.4.2024) Cash on hand and at Bank|12,000|Staff salary, bonus and stipend to articled clerks|21,50,000|
|Fee from professional services (Gross)|59,38,000|Other administrative expenses|11,48,000|
|Rent|50,000|Office rent|30,000|
|Motor car loan from Canara Bank (@ 9% p.a.)|2,50,000|Housing loan repaid to SBI (includes interest of ` 88,000)|1,88,000|
|Life insurance premium (10% of sum assured)|24,000| | |
|Motor car (acquired in Jan. 2025 by A/c payee cheque)|4,25,000| | |
|Medical insurance premium (for self and wife) (paid by A/c Payee cheque)|18,000| | |
|Books bought on 1.07.2024 (annual publications by A/c payee cheque)|20,000| | |
|Computer acquired on 1.11.2024 by A/c payee cheque (for professional use)|30,000| | |
|Domestic drawings|2,72,000| | |

# 9.36 INCOME TAX LAW

|Public provident fund subscription|20,000|
|---|---|
|Motor car maintenance|10,000|
|Closing balance (31.3.2025) Cash on hand and at Bank|19,15,000|
|62,50,000|62,50,000|

Following further information is given to you:

1. He occupies 50% of the building for own residence and let out the balance for residential use at a monthly rent of ` 5,000. The building was constructed during the year 1997-98, when the housing loan was taken.
2. Motor car was put to use both for official and personal purpose. One-fifth of the motor car use is for personal purpose. No car loan interest was paid during the year.
3. The written down value of assets as on 1-4-2024 are given below:
|Furniture & Fittings|60,000|
|---|---|
|Plant & Machinery (Air-conditioners, Photocopiers, etc.)|80,000|
|Computers|50,000|

Note: Mr. Rajiv follows regularly the cash system of accounting.

Compute the total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y. 2025-26 assuming that he has shifted out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# 8.

From the following details, compute the total income and tax liability of Siddhant, aged 31 years, of Delhi both as per section 115BAC and as per the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the A.Y.2025-26. Advise Mr. Siddhant whether he should opt for section 115BAC:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Salary including dearness allowance|4,35,000|
|Bonus|15,000|
|Salary of servant provided by the employer|12,000|
|Rent paid by Siddhant for his accommodation|49,600|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Bills paid by the employer for gas, electricity and water provided free of cost at the above flat: 11,000

Siddhant purchased a flat in a co-operative housing society in Delhi for ₹ 4,75,000 in April, 2016, which was financed by a loan from Life Insurance Corporation of India of ₹ 1,60,000 @ 15% interest, his own savings of ₹ 65,000 and a deposit from a nationalized bank for ₹ 2,50,000 to whom this flat was given on lease for ten years. The rent payable by the bank was ₹ 3,500 per month. The following particulars are relevant:

- (a) Municipal taxes paid by Mr. Siddhant: ₹ 4,300 (per annum)
- (b) House Insurance: ₹ 860
- (c) He earned ₹ 2,700 in share speculation business and lost ₹ 4,200 in cotton speculation business.
- (d) In the year 2021-22, he had gifted ₹ 30,000 to his wife and ₹ 20,000 to his son who was aged 11. The gifted amounts were advanced to Mr. Rajesh, who was paying interest @ 19% per annum.
- (e) Siddhant received a gift of ₹ 30,000 each from four friends.
- (f) He contributed ₹ 50,000 to Public Provident Fund.

# 9. Ramdin, aged 33 years

Working as Manager (Sales) with Frozen Foods Ltd., provides the following information for the year ended 31.03.2025:

- − Basic Salary: ₹ 15,000 p.m.
- − DA (50% of it is meant for retirement benefits): ₹ 12,000 p.m.
- − Commission as a percentage of turnover of the Company: 0.5 %
- − Turnover of the Company: ₹ 50 lakhs
- − Bonus: ₹ 50,000
- − Gratuity: ₹ 30,000
- − Own Contribution to R.P.F.: ₹ 30,000
- − Employer’s contribution to R.P.F.: 20% of basic salary
- − Interest credited in the R.P.F. account @ 15% p.a.: ₹ 15,000
- − Gold Ring worth ₹ 10,000 was given by employer on his 25ᵗʰ wedding anniversary.
# 9.38 INCOME TAX LAW

- Music System purchased on 01.04.2024 by the company for ` 85,000 and was given to him for personal use.
- Two old light goods vehicles owned by him were leased to a transport company against the fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. Books of account are not maintained.
- Received interest of ` 5,860 on bank FDRs on 24.4.2024 and interest of ` 6,786 (Net) from the debentures of Indian Companies on 5.5.2024.
- Made payment by cheques of ` 15,370 towards premium on Life Insurance policies and ` 22,500 for Mediclaim Insurance policy for self and spouse.
- Invested in NSC ` 30,000 and in FDR of SBI for 5 years ` 50,000.
- Donations of ` 11,000 to an institution approved u/s 80G and of ` 5,100 to Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund were given during the year by way of cheque.

Compute his total income and tax payable thereon for the A.Y. 2025-26. Assume that Mr. Ramdin has exercised the option to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# 10.

From the following particulars furnished by Mr. X for the year ended 31.3.2025, you are requested to compute his total income and tax payable for the assessment year 2025-26, assuming that he opts out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

- (a) Mr. X retired on 31.12.2024 at the age of 58, after putting in 26 years and 1 month of service, from a private company at Mumbai.
- (b) He was paid a salary of ` 25,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of ` 6,000 p.m. He paid rent of ` 6,500 p.m. during his tenure of service.
- (c) On retirement, he was paid a gratuity of ` 3,50,000. He was covered by the payment of Gratuity Act. Mr. X had not received any other gratuity at any point of time earlier, other than this gratuity.
- (d) He had accumulated leave of 15 days per annum during the period of his service; this was encashed by Mr. X at the time of his retirement. A sum of ` 3,15,000 was received by him in this regard. His average salary for last 10 months may be taken as ` 24,500. Employer allowed 30 days leave per annum.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

(e) After retirement, he ventured into textile business and incurred a loss of ` 80,000 for the period upto 31.3.2025.

(f) Mr. X has deposited ` 1,00,000 in public provident fund.

# 11.

Rosy and Mary are sisters, born and brought up at Mumbai. Rosy got married in 1982 and settled at Canada since 1982. Mary got married and settled in Mumbai. Both of them are below 60 years. The following are the details of their income for the previous year ended 31.3.2025:

|S. No.|Particulars|Rosy|Mary|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|Pension received from State Government|--|60,000|
|2.|Pension received from Canadian Government|20,000|--|
|3.|Long-term capital gain on sale of land on 15.5.2024 at Mumbai taxable|1,00,000|1,00,000|
|4.|Short-term capital gain on sale of shares on 23.4.2024 of Indian listed companies in respect of which STT was paid|20,000|2,50,000|
|5.|LIC premium paid|--|10,000|
|6.|Premium paid to Canadian Life Insurance Corporation at Canada|40,000|--|
|7.|Mediclaim policy premium paid by A/c Payee Cheque|--|25,000|
|8.|Deposit in PPF|--|20,000|
|9.|Rent received in respect of house property at Mumbai|60,000|30,000|

Compute the total income and tax liability of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the A.Y. 2025-26 and tax thereon assuming both exercised the option to shift out of the default tax regime.

# 12.

Mr. X, an individual set up a unit in Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in the financial year 2019-20 for production of washing machines. The unit fulfills all the conditions of section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961. During the financial year 2023-24, he has also set up a warehousing facility in a district of Tamil Nadu for storage of agricultural produce. It fulfills all the conditions.
# 9.40 INCOME TAX LAW

of section 35AD. Capital expenditure in respect of warehouse amounted to ₹ 75 lakhs (including cost of land ₹ 10 lakhs). The warehouse became operational with effect from 1st April, 2024 and the expenditure of ₹ 75 lakhs was capitalized in the books on that date.

Relevant details for the F.Y. 2024-25 are as follows:

|Particulars|₹|
|---|---|
|Profit of unit located in SEZ|40,00,000|
|Export turnover received in India in convertible foreign exchange on or before 30.9.2025|80,00,000|
|Domestic sales of above unit|20,00,000|
|Profit from operation of warehousing facility (before considering deduction under Section 35AD)|1,05,00,000|

Compute income-tax (including AMT under Section 115JC) liability of Mr. X for A.Y. 2025-26 both as per section 115BAC and as per regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y. 2025-26. Advise Mr. X whether he should pay tax under default tax regime or normal provisions of the Act.

# ANSWERS

# 1. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Gupta for the A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime

(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ₹ 1,02,00,000

|₹ 3,00,000 – ₹ 7,00,000 @5%|₹ 20,000|
|---|---|
|₹ 7,00,001 – ₹ 10,00,000 @10%|₹ 30,000|
|₹ 10,00,001 – ₹ 12,00,000 @15%|₹ 30,000|
|₹ 12,00,001 – ₹ 15,00,000 @20%|₹ 60,000|
|₹ 15,00,001 – ₹ 1,02,00,000 @30%|₹ 26,10,000|
|Total|₹ 27,50,000|
|Add: Surcharge @15%|₹ 4,12,500|
| |₹ 31,62,500|

(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ₹ 1 crore (₹ 1,40,000 plus ₹ 25,50,000) ₹ 26,90,000
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|Add: Surcharge@10%|` 2,69,000|
|---|---|
| |` 29,59,000|
|(C) Total Income Less ` 1crore|` 2,00,000|
|(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore plus the excess of total income over ` 1 crore (B +C)|` 31,59,000|
|(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D)|` 31,59,000|
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 1,26,360|
|Tax liability (including cess)|` 32,85,360|
|(F) Marginal Relief (A – D)|` 3,500|

# Alternative method -

|(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 1,02,00,000| | |
|---|---|---|
|` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5%|` 20,000| |
|` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @10%|` 30,000| |
|` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15%|` 30,000| |
|` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20%|` 60,000| |
|` 15,00,001 – ` 1,02,00,000 @30%|` 26,10,000| |
|Total|` 27,50,000| |
|Add: Surcharge @ 15%|` 4,12,500| |
| |` 31,62,500| |
|(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore|[(` 1,40,000 plus ` 25,50,000) plus surcharge@10%]|` 29,59,000|
|(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B)|` 2,03,500| |
|(D) Marginal Relief (` 2,03,500 – ` 2,00,000, being the amount of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000)|` 3,500| |
|(E) Tax liability (A)-(D)|` 31,59,000| |
|Add: Health and education cess @4%|` 1,26,360| |
|Tax liability (including cess)|` 32,85,360| |

# 9.42 INCOME TAX LAW

(a) Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any previous year, if he/she satisfies any one of the following conditions:

- (i) He/she has been in India during the previous year for a total period of 182 days or more, or
- (ii) He/she has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in India for at least 60 days in the previous year.

If an individual satisfies any one of the conditions mentioned above, he/she is a resident. If both the above conditions are not satisfied, the individual is a non-resident.

Therefore, the residential status of Miss Charlie, an American National, for A.Y.2025-26 has to be determined on the basis of her stay in India during the P.Y.2024-25 and in the preceding four previous years. Her stay in India during the P.Y.2024-25 and in the preceding four years are as under:

|P.Y. 2024-25|01.04.2024 to 19.09.2024|-|172 days|
|---|---|---|---|
| |27.03.2025 to 31.03.2025|-|5 days|
|Total| | |177 days|
|Four preceding previous years|P.Y. 2023-24 [1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024]|-|16 days|
| |P.Y. 2022-23 [1.4.2022 to 31.3.2023]|-|Nil|
| |P.Y. 2021-22 [1.4.2021 to 31.3.2022]|-|Nil|
| |P.Y. 2020-21 [1.4.2020 to 31.3.2021]|-|Nil|
|Total| | |16 days|

The total stay of the assessee during the previous year in India was less than 182 days and during the four years preceding this year was for 16 days. Therefore, due to non-fulfillment of any of the two conditions for a resident, she would be treated as non-resident for the A.Y.2025-26.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# Computation of total income of Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Income from house property| |
|Show room located in Mumbai remained on rent from 01.05.2024 to 31.03.2025 @ 2,75,000 ` 25,000/- p.m.| |
|Gross Annual Value [` 25,000 x 11] (See Note 1 below)|2,75,000|
|Less: Municipal taxes|Nil|
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|2,75,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 24| |
|30% of NAV|82,500|
|Interest on loan|97,500|
| |1,80,000|
|Income from other sources| |
|Cash gifts received from non-relatives is chargeable to tax as per section 56(2)(x), if the aggregate value of such gifts exceeds ` 50,000.| |
|- ` 50,000 received from parents of husband would be exempt, since parents of husband fall within the definition of ‘relative’ and gifts from a relative are not chargeable to tax.|Nil|
|- ` 11,000 received from married sister of husband is exempt, since sister-in-law falls within the definition of relative and gifts from a relative are not chargeable to tax.|Nil|
|- Gift received from two friends of husband ` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000 aggregating to ` 1,72,000 is taxable under section 56(2)(x) since the aggregate of ` 1,72,000 exceeds ` 50,000. (See Note 2 below)|1,72,000|
|Total income|2,67,000|

# 9.44 INCOME TAX LAW

# Computation of tax liability by Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|Tax on total income of ` 2,67,000|850|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|34|
|Total tax liability|884|
|Total tax liability (rounded off)|880|

# Notes:

1. Actual rent received has been taken as the gross annual value in the absence of other information (i.e. Municipal value, fair rental value and standard rent) in the question.
2. If the aggregate value of taxable gifts received from non-relatives exceed ` 50,000 during the year, the entire amount received (i.e. the aggregate value of taxable gifts received) is taxable. Therefore, the entire amount of ` 1,72,000 is taxable under section 56(2)(x).
3. Since Miss Charlie is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2025-26, rebate under section 87A would not be available to her, even though her total income does not exceed ` 5 lakhs.

# (b) Residential status of Miss Charlie in case she is a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 18,00,000

If she is a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 (` 18,00,000, in her case), the condition of stay in India for a period exceeding 120 days during the previous year and 365 days during the four immediately preceding previous years would be applicable for being treated as a resident. Since her stay in India exceeds 120 days in the P.Y.2024-25 but the period of her stay in India during the four immediately preceding previous years is less than 365 days (only 16 days), her residential status as per section 6(1) would continue to be same i.e., non-resident in India. Further, since she is not a citizen of India, the provisions of section 6(1A) deeming an individual to be a citizen of India would not get attracted in her case, even though she is a person of Indian origin.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 and she is not liable to pay tax in USA. Therefore, her residential status would be non-resident in India for the previous year 2024-25.

# 3. Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime

|Particulars|`|`|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|I Income from Salary| | | |
|Basic Salary (` 7,500 x 12)|90,000| | |
|Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|75,000|15,000| |
|II Income from house property| | | |
|Gross Annual Value (GAV)|27,000| | |
|Less: Municipal taxes paid|2,000| | |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|25,000| | |
|Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of ` 25,000|7,500|17,500| |
|III Income from profession| | | |
|Net profit as per Income and Expenditure account|4,40,400| | |
|Less: Items of income to be treated separately| | | |
|(i) Rent received (taxable under the head “Income from house property”)|27,000| | |
|(ii) Dividend from units of UTI (taxable under the head “Income from other sources”)|10,500| | |
|(iii) Winning from game show on T.V. (net of TDS) – taxable under the head “Income from other sources”|35,000| | |

# 9.46 INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) Income tax refund

5,450
77,950
3,62,450
Less: Allowable expenditure

Depreciation on clinic equipments

|on ` 5,00,000@15%|75,000| |
|---|---|---|
|on ` 2,00,000@7.5%|15,000|90,000|

(On equipments acquired during the year in December 2024, she is entitled to depreciation @50% of normal depreciation, since the same are put to use for less than 180 days during the year)

2,72,450
Add: Items of expenditure not allowable while computing business income

|(i) Amount paid to scientific research association approved u/s 35 (not allowed under default tax regime)|1,50,000| |
|---|---|---|
|(i) Rent for her residential accommodation included in Income and Expenditure A/c|30,000| |
|(ii) Municipal tax paid relating to residential house at Surat included in administrative expenses|2,000|1,82,000|

IV Income from other sources

|(a) Interest on income-tax refund|450| |
|---|---|---|
|(b) Dividend from UTI (taxable in the hands of unit holders)|10,500| |
|(c) Winnings from TV game show (` 35,000 + ` 15,000)|50,000|60,950|

Gross Total Income

5,47,900
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A:

|(a) Section 80C [Not allowed under default tax regime]|Nil|
|---|---|
|(b) Section 80D [Not allowed under default tax regime]|Nil|
|(c) Section 80E [Not allowed under default tax regime]|Nil|

# Total income

5,47,900

# Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Total Income as per default tax regime| |5,47,900|
|Add: Standard deduction of Rs. 25,000, being the excess amount allowed u/s 115BAC| |25,000|
|Less: Items of expenditure allowable while computing business income under normal provisions of the Act| | |
|100% deduction is allowable in respect of the amount paid to scientific research association allowable under normal provisions of the Act.| |1,50,000|
|Gross Total Income as per normal provisions of the Act| |4,22,900|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A:| | |
|(a) Section 80C - Tuition fee paid to university for full time education of her daughter|1,00,000| |
|(b) Section 80D - Medical insurance premium (fully allowed since she is a senior citizen)|28,000| |

# 9.48 INCOME TAX LAW

(c) Section 80E - Interest on loan taken for higher education is deductible 55,000 1,83,000

Total income 2,39,900

# Notes:

1. The principal amount received towards income-tax refund will be excluded from computation of total income. Interest received will be taxed under the head “Income from other sources”.
2. Winnings from game show on T.V. should be grossed up for the chargeability under the head “Income from other sources” (` 35,000 + ` 15,000). Thereafter, while computing tax liability, TDS of ` 15,000 should be deducted to arrive at the tax payable. Winnings from game show are subject to tax @30% as per section 115BB.
3. Dr. Niranjana would not be eligible for deduction u/s 80GG under normal provisions of the Act, as she owns a house in Surat, a place where she is residing as well as carrying on her profession.

# 4. Computation of total income and tax payable by Ms. Purvi for the A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime under section 115BAC

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from house property (See Working Note 1)|57,820| |
|Profit and gains of business or profession (See Working Note 2)|9,20,200| |
|Income from other sources (See Working Note 3)|33,924| |
|Gross Total Income|10,11,944| |
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A [not allowable under default tax regime]|-| |
|Total Income|10,11,944| |
|Total Income (rounded off)|10,11,940| |

# Tax on total income

|Upto ` 3,00,000|Nil|
|---|---|
|` 3,00,001 - ` 7,00,000 @5%|20,000|
|` 7,00,001 - ` 10,00,000 @10%|30,000|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|` 10,00,001 - ` 10,11,940 @ 15%| |1,791|51,791|
|---|---|---|---|
|Add: Health and Education cess @ 4%| | |2,072|
|Total tax liability| | |53,863|
|Less: Advance tax paid| | |70,000|
|Less: Tax deducted at source on dividend income from an Indian company u/s 194| |1,052|1,812|
|Tax deducted at source on income from UTI u/s 194K| |760| |
|Tax Payable/ (Refundable)| | |(17,949)|
|Tax Payable/ (Refundable) (rounded off)| | |(17,950)|

# Computation of total income and tax payable under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Total Income|10,11,944| |
|[Income under the “Income from house property” “Profits and gains from business or profession” and “Income from other sources” would remain the same even if Ms. Purvi opts out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC]|[Income under the “Income from house property” “Profits and gains from business or profession” and “Income from other sources” would remain the same even if Ms. Purvi opts out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC]|[Income under the “Income from house property” “Profits and gains from business or profession” and “Income from other sources” would remain the same even if Ms. Purvi opts out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC]|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A (See Working Note 4)|10,000| |
|Total Income|10,01,944| |
|Total Income (rounded off)|10,01,940| |

# Tax on total income

|Upto ` 2,50,000|Nil|
|---|---|
|` 2,50,001 – ` 5,00,000 @5%|12,500|
|` 5,00,000 - ` 10,00,000 @20%|1,00,000|
|` 10,00,000 – ` 10,01,940 @ 30%|582|
|Add: Health and Education cess @ 4%|4,523|
|Total tax liability|1,17,605|

# 9.50 INCOME TAX LAW

Less: Advance tax paid 70,000

Less: TDS u/s 194 on dividend 1,052

TDS u/s 194K on income from UTI 760 1,812

Tax Payable 45,793

Tax Payable (rounded off) 45,790

Since there is tax refundable under default tax regime under section 115BAC and tax payable under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, it would be beneficial for Ms. Purvi to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# Working Notes:

# (1) Income from House Property

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Gross Annual Value under section 23(1)|85,600| |
|Less: Municipal taxes paid|3,000| |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|82,600| |
|Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of NAV|24,780|57,820|

Note - Rent received has been taken as the Gross Annual Value in the absence of other information relating to Municipal Value, Fair Rent and Standard Rent.

# (2) Income under the head “Profits & Gains of Business or Profession”

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Net profit as per Income and Expenditure account|9,28,224| |
|Add: Expenses debited but not allowable| | |
|(i) Salary paid to computer specialist in cash|30,000| |
|disallowed u/s 40A(3), since such cash payment exceeds ` 10,000| | |
|(ii) Amount paid for purchase of car is not allowable under section 37(1) since it is a capital expenditure|80,000| |

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|(ii) Municipal taxes paid in respect of residential flat let out|3,000|1,13,000|
|---|---|---|
|Add: Value of benefit received from clients during the course of profession [taxable as business income under section 28(iv)]| |10,500|
| | |10,51,724|
|Less: Income credited but not taxable under this head:| | |
|(i) Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian company (taxable under the head “Income from other sources”)| |10,524|
|(ii) Income from UTI (taxable under the head “Income from other sources”)| |7,600|
|(iii) Honorarium for valuation of answer papers| |15,800|
|(iv) Rent received from letting out of residential flat|85,600|1,19,524|
| | |9,32,200|
|Less: Depreciation on motor car @15% (See Note (i) below)| |12,000|
| | |9,20,200|

# Notes:

(i) It has been assumed that the motor car was put to use for more than 180 days during the previous year and hence, full depreciation @ 15% has been provided for under section 32(1)(ii).

Note: Alternatively, the question can be solved by assuming that motor car has been put to use for less than 180 days and accordingly, only 50% of depreciation would be allowable as per the second proviso below section 32(1)(ii).
# 9.52 INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Incentive to articled assistants for passing CA Intermediate examination in their first attempt is deductible under section 37(1).

(iii) Repairs and maintenance paid in advance for the period 1.4.2025 to 30.9.2025 i.e. for 6 months amounting to ` 1,000 is allowable since Ms. Purvi is following the cash system of accounting.

(iv) ` 32,000 expended on foreign tour is allowable as deduction assuming that it was incurred in connection with her professional work. Since it has already been debited to income and expenditure account, no further adjustment is required.

# (3) Income from other sources

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian company (taxable in the hands of shareholders)|10,524|
|Income from UTI (taxable in the hands of unit holders)|7,600|
|Honorarium for valuation of answer papers|15,800|
| |33,924|

# (4) Deduction under Chapter VI-A :

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC)|10,000|
|Deduction under section 80D (See Notes (i) & (ii) below)|Nil|
|Total deduction under Chapter VI-A|10,000|

# Notes:

(i) Premium paid to insure the health of brother is not eligible for deduction under section 80D, even though he is a dependent, since brother is not included in the definition of “family” under section 80D.

(ii) Premium paid to insure the health of major son is not eligible for deduction, even though he is a dependent, since payment is made in cash.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# 5. Computation of total income of Mr. Y for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business or profession (See Working Note 1 below)|11,21,500|
|Income from other sources (See Working Note 2 below)|54,500|
|Gross Total Income|11,76,000|
|Less: Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC)|15,000|
|Total Income|11,61,000|

# Working Notes:

# 1. Computation of profits and gains of business or profession

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Net profit as per profit and loss account|11,20,000| |
|Add: Expenses debited to profit and loss account but not allowable as deduction| | |
|Salary paid to brother disallowed to the extent considered unreasonable [Section 40A(2)]|2,500| |
|Motor car expenses attributable to personal use not allowable (` 78,000 × ¼)|19,500| |
|Depreciation debited in the books of account|55,000| |
|Drawings (not allowable since it is personal in nature) [See Note (iii)]|10,000| |
|Investment in NSC [See Note (iii)]|15,000|1,02,000|
| | |12,22,000|
|Add: Under statement of closing stock| |12,000|
| | |12,34,000|
|Less: Under statement of opening stock| |8,000|

# 9.54 INCOME TAX LAW

Less: Contribution to a University approved and notified u/s 35(1)(ii) is eligible for 100% deduction. Since whole of the actual contribution (100%) has been debited to profit and loss account, no further adjustment is required.

12,26,000

Less: Incomes credited to profit and loss account but not taxable as business income

|Income from UTI [taxable under the head “Income from other sources”]|22,000|
|---|---|
|Interest on debentures (taxable under the head “Income from other sources”)|17,500|
|Winnings from horse races (taxable under the head “Income from other sources”)|15,000|
|Total|54,500|

11,71,500

Less: Depreciation allowable under the Income-tax Rules, 1962

50,000

11,21,500

# Notes:

1. Advertisement expenses of revenue nature, namely, gift of dry fruits to important customers, is incurred wholly and exclusively for business purposes. Hence, the same is allowable as deduction under section 37.
2. Disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted in respect of cash payment exceeding ` 10,000 to A & Co., a goods transport operator, since, in case of payment made for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, an increased limit of ` 35,000 is applicable (i.e. payment of upto ` 35,000 can be made in cash without attracting disallowance under section 40A(3)).
3. Since drawings and investment in NSC have been given effect to in the profit and loss account, the same have to be added back to arrive at the business income.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

(iv) In point no. 9 of the question, it has been given that depreciation as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 is ` 50,000. It has been assumed that, in the said figure of ` 50,000, only the proportional depreciation (i.e., 75% for business purposes) has been included in respect of motor car.

# 2. Computation of “Income from Other Sources”

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Dividend from UTI|22,000|
|Interest on debentures|17,500|
|Winnings from races|15,000|
| |54,500|

# 6. Computation of total income of Balamurugan for the year ended 31.03.2025

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salaries|2,70,000| |
|Less: Loss from house property (Cannot be set off against income under any other head)|- 2,70,000| |
|Profits and gains of business or profession| | |
|Speculation business income|1,00,000| |
|Less: Business loss of ` 1,35,000 set-off to the extent of ` 1,00,000|(1,00,000)| |
| |Nil| |
|Balance current year business loss of ` 35,000 to be set-off against long-term capital gain| | |
|Capital Gains| | |
|Long term capital gain|70,000| |
|Less: Balance current year business loss set-off|(35,000)| |
|Long term capital gain after set off of business loss|35,000| |
|Income from other sources| | |
|Lottery winnings (Gross)|5,00,000| |
|Total Income| |8,05,000|

# 9.56 INCOME TAX LAW

# Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars| |
|---|---|
|On total income of ` 2,70,000 (excluding lottery winning and LTCG)|Nil|
|On LTCG of ` 5,000 @20% (balance unexhausted basic exemption limit of ` 30,000 can be adjusted against LTCG taxable u/s 112)|1,000|
|On lottery winnings of ` 5,00,000 @ 30%|1,50,000|
|Total tax liability|1,57,040|

Add: Health and Education cess @ 4% 6,040

Total tax liability 1,57,040

The assessee need not pay advance tax since the total income (excluding lottery income) liable to tax is below the basic exemption limit. Further, in respect of lottery income, tax would have been deducted at source @ 30% under section 194B. Since the remaining tax liability of ` 6,040 (` 1,57,040 – ` 1,50,000) is less than ` 10,000, advance tax liability is not attracted.

Note - The first proviso to section 234C(1) provides that since it is not possible for the assessee to estimate his income from lotteries, the entire amount of tax payable (after considering TDS) on such income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due. Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31ˢᵗ March, 2025. The first proviso to section 234C(1) would be attracted only in case of non-deduction or short-deduction of tax at source under section 194B. In this case, it has been assumed that tax deductible at source under section 194B has been fully deducted from lottery income. Since the remaining tax liability of ` 1,040 (` 1,57,040 – ` 1,50,000) is less than ` 10,000, advance tax liability is not attracted.

# 7. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|`|
|---|---|---|---|
|Income from house property| | | |
|Self-occupied| | | |
|Annual value|Nil| | |
|Less: Deduction under section 24(b)| | | |

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# Interest on housing loan

50% of ` 88,000 = 44,000 but limited to 30,000

Loss from self-occupied property (30,000)

# Let out property

Annual value (Rent receivable has been taken as the annual value in the absence of other information) 60,000

Less: Deductions u/s 24

30% of Net Annual Value 18,000

Interest on housing loan (50% of ` 88,000) 44,000

Loss from house property (32,000)

# Profits and gains of business or profession

Fees from professional services 59,38,000

Less: Expenses allowable as deduction

|Staff salary, bonus and stipend|21,50,000|
|---|---|
|Other administrative expenses|11,48,000|
|Office rent|30,000|
|Motor car maintenance (10,000 x 4/5)|8,000|
|Car loan interest – not allowable (since the same has not been paid and the assessee follows cash system of accounting)|Nil|

Less: Depreciation 26,02,000

|Motor car ` 4,25,000 x 7.5% x 4/5|25,500|
|---|---|
|Books being annual publications@40%|8,000|
|Furniture and fittings@10% of ` 60,000|6,000|
|Plant and machinery@15% of ` 80,000|12,000|
|Computer@40% of ` 50,000|20,000|

# 9.58 INCOME TAX LAW

|Computer (New)|30,000 @ 40% x 50%|6,000|77,500|25,24,500| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Gross Total income| | |24,92,500| | |
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A| | | | | |
|Deduction under section 80C| | | | | |
|Housing loan principal repayment|1,00,000|PPF subscription|20,000|Life insurance premium|24,000|
|Total amount of ` 1,44,000 is allowed as deduction since it is within the limit of|` 1,50,000| | | | |
|Deduction under section 80D| | | | | |
|Medical insurance premium paid| |18,000|1,62,000| | |
|Total income| | |23,30,500| | |

# 8. Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant under default tax regime under section 115BAC for the A.Y. 2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Salary Income| | |
|Salary including dearness allowance|4,35,000| |
|Bonus|15,000| |
|Value of perquisites:| | |
|(i) Salary of servant|12,000| |
|(ii) Free gas, electricity and water|11,000|23,000|
|Total|Total|4,73,000|
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)| |75,000|
|Total|Total|3,98,000|
|Income from house property| | |
|Gross Annual Value (GAV) (Rent receivable is taken as GAV in the absence of other information) (` 3,500 × 12)|42,000| |
|Less: Municipal taxes paid|4,300| |
|Net Annual Value (NAV)|37,700| |

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

|Less: Deductions under section 24| |
|---|---|
|(i) 30% of NAV|` 11,310|
|(ii) Interest on loan from LIC @15% of ` 1,60,000 [See Note 2]|` 24,000|
|Total Deductions|` 35,310|
|Income from speculative business| |
|Income from share speculation business|` 2,700|
|Less: Loss of ` 4,200 from cotton speculation business|` 2,700|
|set-off to the extent of ` 2,700|Nil|
|Balance loss of ` 1,500 from cotton speculation business has to be carried forward to the next year as it cannot be set off against any other head of income.| |
|Income from Other Sources| |
|(i) Income on account of interest earned from advancing money gifted to his minor son is includible in the hands of Siddhant as per section 64(1A) [Exemption under section 10(32) would not be available]|` 3,800|
|(ii) Interest income earned from advancing money gifted to wife has to be clubbed with the income of the assessee as per section 64(1)|` 5,700|
|(iii) Gift received from four friends (taxable under section 56(2)(x) as the aggregate amount received during the year exceeds ` 50,000)|` 1,20,000|
|Total Income from Other Sources|` 1,29,500|
|Gross Total Income|` 5,29,890|
|Deduction under section 80C [No deduction under Chapter VI-A would be allowed as per section 115BAC(2)]|Nil|
|Total Income|` 5,29,890|

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income [5% of ` 2,29,890 (` 5,29,890 - ` 3,00,000)]|` 11,495|
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not exceed ` 7,00,000|` 11,495|
|Tax liability|Nil|

# 9.60 INCOME TAX LAW

# Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant for the A.Y. 2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Gross total income (as per default scheme)|5,29,890|
|Add: Standard Deduction [Rs. 25,000 being excess amount allowed under section 115BAC]|25,000|
|Less: Exemption u/s 10(32) in respect of interest income of minor son included in the hands of Siddhant|1,500|
|Gross total income (under the normal provisions of the Act)|5,53,390|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A| |
|Under section 80C [Contribution to PPF]|50,000|
|Total Income|5,03,390|

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Tax on total income [5% of ` 2,50,000 + 20% of ` 3,390]|13,178|
|Add: HEC @4%|527|
|Tax liability|13,705|
|Tax liability (Rounded off)|13,710|

Since his total income as per the normal provisions of the Act exceeds ` 5,00,000, he would not be eligible for rebate under section 87A.

Since Mr. Siddhant is not liable to pay any tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to not to exercise the option of shift out of the default tax regime for A.Y.2025-26.

# Notes:

1. It is assumed that the entire loan of ` 1,60,000 is outstanding as on 31.3.2025;
2. Since Siddhant’s own flat in a co-operative housing society, which he has rented out to a nationalized bank, is also in Delhi, he is not eligible for deduction under section 80GG in respect of rent paid by him for his accommodation in Delhi, since one of the conditions to be satisfied for claiming deduction under section 80GG is that the assessee should not own any residential accommodation in the same place.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

# 9. Computation of Total Income of Mr. Ramdin for the A.Y.2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from Salaries| | |
|Basic Salary (` 15,000 x 12)|1,80,000| |
|Dearness Allowance (` 12,000 x12)|1,44,000| |
|Commission on Turnover (0.5% of ` 50 lakhs)|25,000| |
|Bonus|50,000| |
|Gratuity (See Note 1)|30,000| |
|Employer’s contribution to recognized provident fund| | |
|Actual contribution [20% of ` 1,80,000]|36,000| |
|Less: Exempt (See Note 2)|33,240|2,760|
|Interest credited in recognized provident fund account @15% p.a.|15,000| |
|Less: Exempt upto 9.5% p.a.|9,500|5,500|
|Gift of gold ring worth ` 10,000 on 25ᵗʰ wedding anniversary by employer (See Note 3)|10,000| |
|Perquisite value of music system given for personal use (being 10% of actual cost) i.e. 10% of ` 85,000|8,500| |
| |4,55,760| |
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)|50,000| |
| |4,05,760| |
|Profits and Gains of Business or Profession| | |
|Lease of 2 light goods vehicles on contract basis against fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. In this case, presumptive tax provisions of section 44AE will apply i.e. ` 7,500 p.m. for each of the two light goods vehicle (` 7,500 x 2 x 12). He cannot claim lower profits and gains since he has not maintained books of account.|1,80,000| |

# 9.62 INCOME TAX LAW

# Income from Other Sources

|Interest on bank FDRs|5,860|
|---|---|
|Interest on debentures (` 6786 x 100/90)|7,540|
|Gross total Income|5,99,160|

# Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

# Section 80C

|Premium on life insurance policy|15,370|
|---|---|
|Investment in NSC|30,000|
|FDR of SBI for 5 years|50,000|
|Employee’s contribution to recognized provident fund|30,000|
|Total|1,25,370|

# Section 80D – Mediclaim Insurance

22,500
# Section 80G (See Note 4)

10,600
# Total Income

4,40,690
# Tax on total income

|Income-tax [5% of ` 1,90,690 (i.e., ` 4,40,690 – ` 2,50,000)]|9,535|
|---|---|
|Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not exceed ` 5,00,000|9,535|
|Tax liability|Nil|
|Less: Tax deducted at source (` 7,540 – ` 6,786)|754|
|Net tax refundable|754|
|Tax refundable (rounded off)|750|

# Notes:

1. Gratuity received during service is fully taxable.
2. Employer’s contribution in the recognized provident fund is exempt up to 12% of the salary i.e. 12% of (Basic Salary + DA for retirement benefits + Commission based on turnover) = 12% of (` 1,80,000+ (50% of ` 1,44,000)+ ` 25,000) = 12% of 2,77,000 = ` 33,240
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

3. An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable in view of the language of Circular No.15/2001 dated 12.12.2001 that such gifts upto ` 5,000 in the aggregate per annum would be exempt, beyond which it would be taxed as a perquisite. As per this view, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000. In such a case the Income from Salaries would be ` 4,00,760.

4. Deduction under section 80G is computed as under:

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Donation to PM National Relief Fund (100%)|5,100|
|Donation to institution approved under section 80G (50% of ` 11,000) (amount contributed ` 11,000 or 10% of Adjusted Total Income i.e. ` 45,129, whichever is lower)|5,500|
|Total deduction|10,600|

Adjusted Total Income = Gross Total Income − Deductions under section 80C and 80D = ` 5,99,160 − ` 1,47,870 = ` 4,51,290.

# 10. Computation of total income of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Income from Salaries| | |
|Basic salary (` 25,000 x 9 months)|2,25,000| |
|House rent allowance:| | |
|Actual amount received (` 6,000 x 9 months)|54,000| |
|Less : Exemption under section 10(13A)(Note 1)|36,000|18,000|
|Gratuity:| | |
|Actual amount received|3,50,000| |
|Less: Exemption under section 10(10)(ii) (Note 2)|3,50,000|-|
|Leave encashment:| | |
|Actual amount received|3,15,000| |
|Less : Exemption under section 10(10AA) (Note 3)|2,45,000|70,000|
|Gross Salary|3,13,000| |
|Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)| |50,000|
| | |2,63,000|

# 9.64 INCOME TAX LAW

# Profits and gains of business or profession

|Business loss of ` 80,000 to be carried forward as the same cannot be set off against salary income|Nil|
|---|---|
|Gross Total income|2,63,000|
|Less : Deduction under section 80C| |
|Deposit in Public Provident Fund|1,00,000|
|Total income|1,63,000|
|Tax on total income (Nil, since it is lower than the basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000)|Nil|

# Notes:

1. As per section 10(13A), house rent allowance will be exempt to the extent of least of the following three amounts:
|(i) HRA actually received (` 6,000 x 9)|54,000|
|---|---|
|(ii) Rent paid in excess of 10% of salary (` 6,500 – ` 2,500) x 9 months|36,000|
|(iii) 50% of salary|1,12,500|
2. Gratuity of ` 3,50,000 is exempt under section 10(10)(ii), being the minimum of the following amounts:
|(i) Actual amount received|3,50,000|
|---|---|
|(ii) Half month salary for each year of completed service [(` 25,000 x 15/26) x 26 years]|3,75,000|
|(iii) Statutory limit|20,00,000|
3. Leave encashment is exempt upto the least of the following:
|(i) Actual amount received|3,15,000|
|---|---|
|(ii) 10 months average salary (` 24,500 x 10)|2,45,000|
|(iii) Cash equivalent of unavailed leave calculated on the basis of maximum 30 days for every year of actual service rendered to the employer from whose service he retired (See Note 4 below)|3,18,500|
|(iv) Statutory limit|25,00,000|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

(4) Since the leave entitlement of Mr. X as per his employer’s rules is 30 days credit for each year of service and he had accumulated 15 days per annum during the period of his service, he would have availed/taken the balance 15 days leave every year.

Leave entitlement of Mr. X on the basis of 30 days for every year of actual service rendered by him to the employer:

|Leave entitlement of Mr. X|= 30 days/year x 26|780 days|
|---|---|---|
|Less: Leave taken/availed by Mr. X during the period of his service|= 15 days/year x 26|390 days|
|Earned leave to the credit of Mr. X at the time of his retirement|390 days|390 days|
|Cash equivalent of earned leave to the credit of Mr. X at the time of his retirement|= 390 × ` 24,500/30|` 3,18,500|

# 11. Computation of total income of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the A.Y.2025-26

|S. No.|Particulars|Mrs. Rosy (Non-resident)|Mrs. Mary (ROR)|
|---|---|---|---|
|(I)|Salaries| | |
| |Pension recd from State Govt.|` 60,000| |
| |Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)|` 50,000|` 10,000|
| |Pension received from Canadian Government is not taxable in the case of a non-resident since it is earned and received outside India| |` 10,000|
|(II)|Income from house property| | |
| |Rent received from house property at Mumbai (assumed to be the annual value in the absence of other information i.e. municipal value, fair rent and standard rent)|` 60,000|` 30,000|

# 9.66 INCOME TAX LAW

|Less: Deduction u/s 24(a)@30%|18,000|9,000|
|---|---|---|
| |42,000|21,000|
|(III) Capital gains| | |
|Long-term capital gain on sale of land at Mumbai|1,00,000|1,00,000|
|Short term capital gain on sale of shares of Indian listed companies in respect of which STT was paid|20,000|2,50,000|
| |1,20,000|3,50,000|
|(A) Gross Total Income [(I)+(II)+(III)]|1,62,000|3,81,000|
|Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA| | |
|1. Deduction u/s 80C| | |
|1. LIC Premium paid|-|10,000|
|2. Premium paid to Canadian Life Insurance Corporation|40,000|-|
|3. Deposit in PPF|-|20,000|
| |40,000|30,000|
|2. Deduction u/s 80D – Mediclaim premium paid|-|25,000|
| |40,000|55,000|
|(B) Total deduction under Chapter VI-A is restricted to income other than capital gains taxable under sections 111A & 112|40,000|31,000|
|(C) Total income (A-B)|1,22,000|3,50,000|

Tax liability of Mrs. Rosy for A.Y.2025-26

|Tax on long-term capital gains @20% of ` 1,00,000|20,000|
|---|---|
|Tax on short-term capital gains @15% of ` 20,000|3,000|
|Tax on balance income of ` 2,000|Nil|
| |23,000|

Tax liability of Mrs. Mary for A.Y.2025-26

Tax on STCG @15% of ` 1,00,000 [i.e., ` 2,50,000 less ` 1,50,000, being the unexhausted basic exemption limit as per
15,000
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Less: Rebate u/s 87A would be lower of 12,500 or tax liability, since total income does not exceed 5,00,000

2,500

Add: Health and Education cess@4% 920

Total tax liability 23,920

# Notes:

1. Long-term capital gains on sale of land on 15.5.2024, is chargeable to tax@20% as per section 112.
2. Short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares on 23.4.2024 in respect of which securities transaction tax is paid is subject to tax@15% as per section 111A.
3. In case of resident individuals, if the basic exemption limit is not fully exhausted against other income, then, the long-term capital gains u/s 112/short-term capital gains u/s 111A will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance will be taxed at 20%/15%, respectively. However, this benefit is not available to non-residents. Therefore, while Mrs. Mary can adjust unexhausted basic exemption limit against long-term capital gains taxable under section 112 and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A, Mrs. Rosy cannot do so.
4. Since long-term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 20% and short-term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 15%, it is more beneficial for Mrs. Mary to first exhaust her basic exemption limit of 2,50,000 against long-term capital gains of 100,000 and the balance limit of 1,50,000 (i.e., 2,50,000 – 1,50,000) against short-term capital gains.
5. Rebate under section 87A would not be available to Mrs. Rosy even though her total income does not exceed 5,00,000, since she is non-resident for the A.Y. 2025-26.
# 9.68 INCOME TAX LAW

# 12. Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26

# (under default tax regime under section 115BAC)

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business or profession| |
|Profit from unit in SEZ|40,00,000|
|Profit from operation of warehousing facility|1,05,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation under section 32| |
|On building @10% of ` 65 lakhs⁴ (normal depreciation under section 32 is allowable)|6,50,000|
|Total Income|1,38,50,000|

# Computation of tax liability as per section 115BAC

|Tax on ` 1,38,50,000|38,45,000|
|---|---|
|Add: Surcharge@15%|5,76,750|
| |44,21,750|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%|1,76,870|
|Total tax liability|45,98,620|

# Notes:

1. Deductions u/s 10AA and 35AD are not allowable as per section 115BAC(2). However, normal depreciation u/s 32 is allowable.
2. Mr. X is not liable to alternate minimum tax u/s 115JC under default tax regime under section 115BAC.

# Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26

# (under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961)

|Particulars|`|
|---|---|
|Profits and gains of business or profession| |
|Profit from unit in SEZ|40,00,000|
|Less: Deduction u/s 10AA [See Note (1) below]|16,00,000|
|Business income of SEZ unit chargeable to tax|24,00,000|

# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Profit from operation of warehousing facility 1,05,00,000

Less: Deduction u/s 35AD [See Note (2) below] 65,00,000

Business income of warehousing facility chargeable to tax 40,00,000

Total Income 64,00,000

# Computation of tax liability (under the normal/regular provisions)

Tax on ` 64,00,000 17,32,500

Add: Surcharge @ 10% (since the total income exceeds ` 50 lakhs but does not exceed ` 1 cr) 1,73,250

19,05,750

Add: Health and Education cess@4% 76,230

Total tax liability 19,81,980

# Computation of adjusted total income of Mr. X for levy of Alternate Minimum Tax

|Particulars|`|`|
|---|---|---|
|Total Income (computed above as per regular provisions of income tax)| |64,00,000|
|Add: Deduction under section 10AA| |16,00,000|
| | |80,00,000|
|Add: Deduction under section 35AD| |65,00,000|
|Less: Depreciation under section 32|On building @10% of `65 lakhs⁵|6,50,000|
| | |58,50,000|
|Adjusted Total Income| |1,38,50,000|
|Alternate Minimum Tax@18.5%| |25,62,250|
|Add: Surcharge@15% (since adjusted total income > ` 1 crore)| |3,84,338|
| | |29,46,588|
|Add: Health and Education cess@4%| |1,17,863|
| | |30,64,451|
|Tax liability u/s 115JC (rounded off)| |30,64,450|

5 Assuming the capital expenditure of `65 lakhs is incurred entirely on buildings
# 9.70 INCOME TAX LAW

Since the regular income-tax payable is less than the alternate minimum tax payable, the adjusted total income shall be deemed to be the total income and tax is leviable @18.5% thereof plus surcharge@15% and cess@4%. Therefore, tax liability as per section 115JC is ` 30,64,450.

Since the tax liability of Mr. X under section 115JC is lower than the tax liability as computed u/s 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for A.Y. 2025-26. Moreover, benefit of alternate minimum tax credit is also available to the extent of tax paid in excess over regular tax.

# AMT Credit to be carried forward under section 115JEE

|Tax liability under section 115JC|30,64,450|
|---|---|
|Less: Tax liability under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961|19,81,980|
| |10,82,470|

# Notes:

1. Deduction under section 10AA in respect of Unit in SEZ =

Profit of the Unit in SEZ × Export turnover of the Unit in SEZ x 50%

Total turnover of the Unit in SEZ

40,00,000 × 80,00,000 x 50% = ` 16,00,000

1,00,00,000
2. Deduction @100% of the capital expenditure is available under section 35AD for A.Y. 2025-26 in respect of specified business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of agricultural produce which commences operation on or after 01.04.2009. Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of such specified business, shall be allowed as deduction during the previous year in which he commences operations of his specified business if the expenditure is incurred prior to the commencement of its operations and the amount is capitalized in the books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its operations.
# INCOME TAX LIABILITY – COMPUTATION AND OPTIMISATION

Deduction under section 35AD would, however, not be available on expenditure incurred on acquisition of land.

In this case, since the capital expenditure of ₹ 65 lakhs (i.e., ₹ 75 lakhs – ₹ 10 lakhs, being expenditure on acquisition of land) has been incurred in the F.Y.2023-24 and capitalized in the books of account on 1.4.2024, being the date when the warehouse became operational, ₹ 65,00,000, being 100% of ₹ 65 lakhs would qualify for deduction under section 35AD.
